
The Stack
On Software and Sovereignty

Benjamin H. Bratton

The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

© 2015 Massachusetts Institute of Technolog

Software is deeply woven into contemporary life—economically, culturally, creatively,
politically—in manners both obvious and nearly invisible. Yet while much is written
about how software is used, and the activities that it supports and shapes, thinking
about software itself has remained largely technical for much of its history. Increasingly, however, artists, scientists, engineers, hackers, designers, and scholars in the
humanities and social sciences are finding that for the questions they face, and the
things they need to build, an expanded understanding of software is necessary. For
such understanding they can call upon a strand of texts in the history of computing
and new media, they can take part in the rich implicit culture of software, and they
also can take part in the development of an emerging, fundamentally transdisciplinary,
computational literacy. These provide the foundation for software studies.
Software Studies uses and develops cultural, theoretical, and practice-oriented
approaches to make critical, historical, and experimental accounts of (and interventions via) the objects and processes of software. The field engages and contributes to
the research of computer scientists, the work of software designers and engineers, and
the creations of software artists. It tracks how software is substantially integrated into
the processes of contemporary culture and society, reformulating processes, ideas, institutions, and cultural objects around their closeness to algorithmic and formal description and action. Software studies proposes histories of computational cultures and
works with the intellectual resources of computing to develop reflexive thinking about
its entanglements and possibilities. It does this both in the scholarly modes of the
humanities and social sciences and in the software creation/research modes of computer science, the arts, and design.
The Software Studies book series, published by the MIT Press, aims to publish the
best new work in a critical and experimental field that is at once culturally and technically literate, reflecting the reality of today’s software culture.

Acknowledgments

This book took shape over several years, and only due to the friendship, collegiality, and support of many people. Whether or not I knew it at the time, at different
moments, each of them ensured that this project would reach fruition. For the conversation, critiques, and cajoling, I am in their debt. At some point, I would like to
host them all at once for a grand dinner. An incomplete invitation list must include
Lida Abdul, Alisa Andrasek, Julieta Aranda, Armen Avanessian, Carla Azar, Juan Azulay,
David Bergman, Ryan Bishop, Mike Bonifer, Alexi Bourbeau, James Bridle, Sheldon
Brown, Anne Burdick, Jose Caballer, Ben Cerveny, Karl Chu, Peter Cowhey, Jordan
Crandall, Kate Crawford, Sean Crowe, Teddy Cruz, Rene Daalder, Marc Davis, Joe Day,
Manuel de Landa, Jessica D’Elena, Neil Denari, Robert Densworth, Ricardo Dominguez,
Tim Durfee, Keller Easterling, Greg Edwards, Adam Eeuwens, Joel Ericson, Simonetta
Falasca-Zamponi, Numair Faraz, Conn Fishburn, Jane Fitzgerald, David Fore, Brady
Forrest, Peter Frankfurt, Ming Fung, Vincent Gallo, Alexandra Daisy Ginsberg, Ken
Goldberg, Eugene Goreshter, Marcelyn Gow, Adam Greenfield, John R. Hall, Serene
Han, Usman Haque, Dick Hebdige, Oliver Hess, Bradley Horowitz, Georgina Huljich,
Jeffrey Inaba, Xeni Jardin, Adriene Jenik, Daniel Jennett, Natalie Jeremijenko, Andrew
Jones, Joshua Kauffman, Ed Keller, Cheryl Kellond, Jeff Kipnis, Wolf Kittler, Norman
Klein, Peter Krapp, Vinca Kruk, Steve Kurzman, Sanford Kwinter, Sylvia Lavin, Rachel
Law, Neil Leach, Carla Leiato, Elizabeth Losh, Sylvère Lotringer, Peter Lunenfeld, Greg
Lynn, Geoff Manaugh, Miltos Manetas, Elena Manferdini, David Maymudes, Cynthia
McCauley, Nandita Biswas Mellamphy, Rebeca Mendez, Andrew Mitchell, Christian
Moeller, Phillipe Morel, Eric Owen Moss, Reza Negarastani, Leonard Nevarez, Robert
Nideffer, Marcos Novak, Juilian Oliver, Lisa Parks, Jussi Parrika, Matteo Pasquenelli,
Constance Penley, Rene Peralta, Paul Petrunia, Florencia Pita, Sascha Pohflepp, Dave
Ragsdale, Ramesh Rao, Casey Reas, Kim Stanley Robinson, Irit Rogoff, Rory Rowan,
Mohammed Salemy, Joachim Sauter, Axel Schmitzberger, Patrik Schumacher, Tien-Ann
Shih, Benedict Singleton, Kevin Slavin, Michael Speaks, Marcelo Spina, Jay Springett,
Nick Srnicek, Brett Stalbaum, Molly Wright Steenson, Bruce Sterling, Gabie Strong, Lin
Su Nalepa, Tiziana Terranova, Skylar Tibbetts, Elizabeth Timme, Bruce Tizes, Daniel van

xiv

Acknowledgments

der Velden, Kazys Varmelis, Victoria Vesna, Joseph Wang, McKenzie Wark, John Welchman, John Wilbanks, Alex Williams, Tom Wiscombe, Nick Whitford-Dyer, Ben Woodard, Katharine Wright, Liam Young, Adam Zaretsky, and Peter Zellner. Special thanks
are due to Roger O. Friedland whose extraordinary support during the most formative
period of research made it possible to realize this project. The decade that I spent teaching at the Southern California Institute of Architecture (SCI-Arc) would not have been
possible without the support and friendship of Hernan Diaz-Alonso. Moving from Los
Angeles to La Jolla at the University of California, San Diego Department of Visual
Arts and Calit2 was made possible by Lev Manovich and Larry Smarr. I am in debt
to all those I have named and to these four in particular. While teaching at UCSD,
the European Graduate School, and SCI-Arc (as well as at UCLA’s Department of
Design|Media Arts and Art Center College of Design’s Media Design Practices graduate
program), I had the privilege of working with several incredibly talented artists, writers,
and designers, many of whom I first met as their teacher and then later again as their
student. There are too many to list, but I especially thank Eli Altman, Adam Bandler,
Simon Battisti, Ian Besler, Zach Blas, Sean Dockrey, Jeremy Douglas, Seth Ferris, Willea
Ferris, Moira Henry, Richard Hollington, William Huber, Jordan Kanter, Miles Kemp,
Aaron Koblin, Sam Kronick (who talked me through some of the key structural ideas
of the book as they were forming), Alejandra Lillo, Benjamin Lotan, Nicholas Pesca,
Drura Parrish, Daniel Rehn, Jessica Rivera, F. Myles Sciotto, Necole Tang, Josh Taron,
Kyle Thomspon, Tricia Wang, Angela Washko, Emily White, and many others. I also
thank Doug Sery at MIT Press for his patience and encouragement in the metamorphosis of this book from idea to object. Thanks also to Lawrence Chit and Pratik Pramanik
for assistance with preparing the final manuscript. Most of all, I thank my family, and
its odd diagram: Bruce, Janet, Dee, Michael, Marci, Jamie, Cindy, Karen, Dave, Edie,
Marion, Ed, Bill, Ethel, and Bruna and Lucien.

Credits

This development of this book was honed largely through invited lectures and conference presentations to varied disciplinary audiences, including art, architecture,
design, computer science, economics, international relations, literature, media studies,
philosophy, and political science. My thanks to those responsible for invitations to
present and discuss interim versions of this work at the Bartlett School of Architecture at University College London; proto/e/co/logics 2 conference, Rovink, Croatia;
École-Normale Supérieure d’Architecture Paris-Malaquais; Parsons/The New School,
New York; Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; University of Michigan; Berlage Institute, Rotterdam; Studio-X, Columbia University, New York; Princeton School
of Architecture; Moscow State; St. Petersberg State; Institute for Higher Economics,
Moscow; Carnegie Endowment, Moscow; Knowlton School of Architecture, Ohio State
University; e-flux Main Space, New York; Winchester School of the Arts, University
of Southampton; Strelka Institute of Architecture, Moscow; The Fall Semester, Miami;
The Summer Forum, Joshua Tree, California; Simon Fraser University, Vancouver;
Incredible Machines conference, Vancouver; California Institute of the Arts, Valencia;
University of Buffalo; University of Southern California; The Guardian Summit, New
York; University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario; Sonic Acts, Amsterdam; TBA21Augarten, Vienna; Kazan State University, Kazan, Tartarstan, Russia; European Graduate School, Saas-Fee, Switzerland; Duke University; UCLA; UC Santa Barbara; UC Irvine;
and others.
The material in the book is previously unpublished, save for a few passages drawn
from articles and book chapters I have published over the past few years. In most cases,
I have reworked these here, but the cores of the ideas are in the original versions, and I
acknowledge them with thanks. Sections of the “Earth” chapter appeared in New Geographies 7: Geographies of Information, ed. Ali Fard and Taraneh Meshkani (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard Graduate School of Design, 2015). Sections of the “Cloud” and “Interface”
chapters draw from “On Geoscapes and the Google Caliphate: Except #Mumbai,” Theory, Culture and Society Annual Review 26 (2009): 329–342. This original article in many
ways was the seed material around which this book evolved. My thanks to Ryan Bishop

xvi

Credits

for his invitation to contribute, and also for setting The Stack in motion. Sections of
the “City” chapter draw from “Ambivalence and/or Utopia,” in Bracket 2: Goes Soft, ed.
Neeraj Bhatia and Lola Sheppard (Barcelona: Actar, 2013), from “Megastructures,” in
Entr’acte, ed. Jordan Geiger (London: Palgrave-Macmillan, 2015), and from “Parametricist Architecture (Would Be a Good Idea)” in The Politics of Parametricism, ed. Matthew
Poole and Manuel Shvartzberg (London: Bloomsbury, 2015). Sections of the “Interface”
chapter draw from “iPhone City (v.2008),” Digital Cities AD: Architectural Design, ed.
Neal Leach, volume 79, no. 4 (2009): 90–97 (London: Wiley, 2009), and from “On
Apps and Elementary Forms of Interfacial Life,” in The Imaginary App, ed. Paul D. Miller
and Svetlana Matviyenko, 3–16 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014). Sections of the
“Earth” and “User” chapters draw from “What We Do Is Secrete: On Virilio, Planetarity
and Data Visualization,” in Virilio and Visual Culture, ed. Ryan Bishop and John Armitage, 180–206 (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2014). Parts of the concluding
chapter draw from “The Black Stack” e-flux journal, no. 53 (March 2014), with special
thanks to Julieta Aranda. This e-flux piece was a reworked version of a co-keynote at
Transmediale 2014 with Metahaven; thanks to Ryan Bishop (again), Jussi Parikka, and
Sean Cubitt for the invitation to Berlin. Finally, special thanks to Daniel van der Velden
and Vinca Kruk of Metahaven for their ongoing friendship and collaboration (and for
the excellent book cover). Many of the key ideas of this book developed in relation to
our dialogues, some published and others not.

Preface

This book is both technical and theoretical. It is unapologetically interdisciplinary in
its perspective and its project; it is a work of political philosophy, and architectural
theory, and software studies, and even science fiction. It draws links between technologies, places, processes, and cultures that may exist at different scales but which are also
deeply interrelated. In this crisscross, we observe that “computation” does not just
denote machinery; it is planetary-scale infrastructure that is changing not only how
governments govern, but also what governance even is in the first place. Computation
is a logic of culture, and so also a logic of design. It is both how our culture designs
and is itself that which we need to design better, but to do that we need to take a step
back and view an emerging big picture that is different from what has been predicted.
We may glimpse that another model of political geography is cohering before our eyes.
What can we do with it? What does it want from us? The answers depend on our theories and tools, on our models and codes.
For design, theory and computation have been intertwined for decades. One might
even suspect a direct correlation between the end of theory and the rise of software
(software being a form of technology that is linguistic as well as a form of language
that is technological). Sometime from 1995 to 1997 or so, especially in academic
design programs, software seemed to displace theory as a tool for thought. Many students interested in asking essential questions about how things work turned to software, not just to describe those things but also to make them, and not just to make
them, but also to think through them. This shift came with trade-offs. Thinking with
tools, and in this case, working with the fixed capital of advanced technologies, is a
good thing. It is part of the genesis of our species. It is how we mediate the world and
are mediated by it; we become what we are by making that which in turn makes us.
This is no less true (or less complex) as software becomes a more ubiquitous feature
of the whole world: in your hand, in the building, part of every supply chain, every
image, every archive, every query. I am of the opinion, however, that as we quickly
learn more precise and higher-resolution processes, it becomes correspondingly

xviii

Preface

harder to see the whole at once. Accomplishments of analysis are paid for with a dissipation of synthesis. As such, software may need theory at least as much as theory
needs software.
As for the geopolitics of computation, we can point to another shift, around 2008
or so. Before this break, the growth of planetary-scale computing systems was seen
more generally as a beneficent blossoming. The old order would be swept away and a
new day illuminated with the power of networks, iStuff, Twitter revolutions, “Internet
freedom,” and smart cities. After this break, however, the sky darkened, and now the
Cloud portends instead state surveillance, tax evasion, structural unemployment, troll
culture, and flash crashes. Reality, however, is actually more radical in both directions.
The thesis of this book holds that the official utopia and the official dystopia are not
particularly useful frames of reference, and that neither provide a robust and intelligent
program for art, design, economics, or engineering. In fact, the messianic effervescence
of the former and the apocalyptic panic of the latter are part of the problem. Today we
lack adequate vocabularies to properly engage the operations of planetary-scale computation, and we make use of those at hand regardless of how poorly they serve us. After
the cycles of positive and negative hype run their course, we discover that computation
holds both more potential and more risk than we foresaw. Going forward, we really do
need new and better models, because computation already operates in ways that have
surpassed and overflowed the regular cartographies.
This book starts with the technologies themselves, abstracting from them a formal
model that is general and comprehensive, but not complete or fixed. The model does
not put technology “inside” a “society,” but sees a technological totality as the armature of the social itself. It does not focus on computation in the service of governance,
or in resistance to governance, but rather on computation as governance. In the first
chapter, I propose that we view the various types of planetary-scale computation (e.g.,
smart grids, cloud computing, mobile and urban-scale software, universal addressing
systems, ubiquitous computing, and robotics, and so on) not as isolated, unrelated
types of computation but as forming a larger, coherent whole. They form an accidental
megastructure called The Stack that is not only a kind of planetary-scale computing
system; it is also a new architecture for how we divide up the world into sovereign
spaces. More specifically, this model is informed by the multilayered structure of software protocol stacks in which network technologies operate within a modular and
interdependent vertical order. The model allegorizes the logic of stacks into a general
principle of systems, and uses it to describe both the geometry by which a political
geography is subdivided as well as the aggregate shape of the technologies that occupy
those spaces. The Stack model is global but it is not immutable. To the contrary, it is
intrinsically modular and so this megastructure is also a platform, and an interface
even, for the redesign and replacement of the Stack-we-have with a Stack-we-want (or
perhaps with the Stack-we-want-the-least).

Preface

xix

Accordingly, The Stack: On Software and Sovereignty is a book of design theory. Its
interests are speculative and projective as well as analytical; it is about sketching things
in advance of their arrival as much as mapping things as they are. It describes a consolidation of cultural, institutional, and technical systems through the exponential
logics of planetary-scale computation and considers how we might recognize and engineer alternative effects. The design horizon for each layer of The Stack is understood
both by what it accomplishes as an ideal technology and, perhaps more important, by
what accidents it brings that also define its real impact. My interest is in how design—
designating things according to program—can work through these schema, across their
disparate scales and toward different futures. What new forms can we compose for this
computational and geopolitical condition, first to map it, then to interpret it, then to
redesign it?
More precisely, then, this book is a design brief; it outlines a design problem and
invites new interventions. It articulates a project of “geodesign” to be taken up as a collaborative megaproject. Problems inevitably arise that cannot be defined in isolation,
but also cannot be engaged other than by specific technical practice, so opportunistic
approaches and experiments are necessary. The argument of this design brief is neither
simply pro-Stack or anti-Stack. Any infrastructure of this scale inevitably gathers and
binds power into itself, and so is either remedy or poison or both. The system we have
now is both what makes these extraordinary technologies possible, but is also what
ultimately retards their real potential. In response, we need a geopolitics of design that
is comfortable not only with computation but also with vertical systems of designation
and decision. The Stack model is a diagram that works only when it is put to use. Perhaps by drawing the whole, we stand a better chance of designing a better architecture
of globalization. Perhaps we are not lacking ideas but a platform to situate, deploy, and
enforce them.
Because The Stack: On Software and Sovereignty draws on many disciplinary discourses,
it is inevitable that some passages may seem opaque and others obvious, and differently so for different readers. Most important are the lines of connection between ideas
and their illustrations. I chose the examples for how they clarify a point made, but I
claim no definitive treatments of any of them. I tried to choose examples that are not
too of-the-moment. Given the subject matter’s pace of change, referring to events that
are richly elucidative even though slightly untimely, may help ensure that the narrative stands the test of time. Similarly, many books about design rely heavily images to
make their point, and my editor and I decided early on that the text should stand on
its own. Let the book be a book. There are (almost) no pictures to be found, but the
companion website (thestack.org or bratton.info/thestack) includes many images and
illustrations accompanying each chapter, and (if you choose) you may refer to these as
you read and approach the book in a way that is a bit more like my visually elaborate
public talks. Like any other project that tries to draw wholes, The Stack produces its own

xx

Preface

vocabulary (e.g., platform sovereignty, loop topology, Cloud feudalism) that becomes clear
as the argument accumulates. To aid readability, I have included a glossary to consult,
or perhaps even to read first.
We are still very early in the historical trajectory of planetary-scale computation.
How its algorithmic species will evolve and how our cultural systems will train them
and be trained by them is anyone’s guess. Writing from inside the research university,
I hope that we will look back on this moment—when you could go to medical school
and not take basic data structures or JAVA, or get a computer science degree and not
be fluent in any of the basic issues in the philosophy of technology or the essential
ideas of contemporary art, or train in a design program without working on any substantive political science problems—as one curtailed by bizarre intellectual paranoia.
Our shared design project will require both different relationships to machines (carbon-based machines and otherwise) and a more promiscuous figurative imagination.
Toward that, this book is my drawing on our cave wall, one that invites response, revision, and even replacement.
November 2014
La Jolla, California

I

The Models

The Maelstrom, a mad spiral, the terror of hardened sailors, the Maelstrom is a circle of circles.
Which circle leads one by chance to escape? Or perhaps to be sucked down to the bottom?
—Michel Serres, “Jules Verne’s Strange Journeys”1
Centralization is vulnerability—and yet the world is not content to build its biomass on such a
fragile template, it forces the same model onto its metasystems as well.
—Peter Watts, “The Things”2
The cybernetics of men. ... As you, Socrates, often call politics.
—Stafford Beer, “Cybernetic Praxis in Government”3

Introduction

1. A New Architecture?
In an address to the Council on Foreign Relations on the need for a new geopolitical
architecture, the outgoing secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, made a rather striking
recommendation: “We need a new architecture for this new world, more Frank Gehry
than formal Greek.”4 She described the system dominated by the United Nations, the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and several other large organizations as the equivalent of the classical Parthenon in Athens. “By contrast, there’s Gehry’s Modern architecture [sic]. ... Some of his work at first might appear haphazard, but in fact, it’s highly
intentional and sophisticated,” Clinton continued. “Where once a few strong columns
could hold up the weight of the world, today we need a dynamic mix of materials and
structures.” Looking to contemporary design for new models of geopolitical architecture, both literal structures and figurative systems, may be a good idea (regardless of
whether Gehry’s singular and floral morphologies are necessarily the best option), but
what drives this demand for new armatures and diagrams of global power and sovereignty? Clinton went on to identify global information systems as perhaps the single
most important powerful engine of the new world that would demand new organizing
architectures. The continuing emergence of planetary-scale computation as metainfrastructure and of information as a historical agent of economic and geographic command together suggest that something fundamental has shifted off-center. But global
transformations of hard and soft systems brought by computation have disturbed neat
arrangements in ways that Clinton struggles to articulate and we struggle to describe
and design for. While trade and migration perforate borders, state sovereignty and
supervision over information flows are also dramatically reinscribed and reinforced.
The possible architectures at work now and in the future seem twisted and torqued in
the extreme.
In this context, this book proposes a specific model for the design of political geography tuned to this era of planetary-scale computation. It works from the inside out,
from technology to governing systems. As we link infrastructure at the continental

4

Introduction

scale, pervasive computing at the urban scale, and ambient interfaces at the perceptual
scale, we will explore how these interweave and how we might build, dwell within,
communicate between, and govern our worlds. To do this, it draws on the multilayered structure of software, hardware, and network “stacks” that arrange different technologies vertically within a modular, interdependent order. From this and from other
non-computational structures, the model abstracts a general logic of platforms, now a
fundamental principle for the design and coordination of complex systems. In practice
this includes outlining an alternative subdivision of political geographies at work now
and in the future, some of which may be familiar and others less so. In doing so, the
chapters pull on threads from different intellectual fabrics and knit them together by
following their crisscrossing patterns. These lead from the long-foretold and longerpostponed eclipse of the nation-state to the ascendance of political theology as an
existential transnationalism, from the billowing depths of cloud computing and ubiquitous addressability to the logistical modernity of the endlessly itinerant object, and
from the return of the city-state in the guise of a multipolar network of megacities
and walled megagardens to the permanent emergency of ecological collapse and back
again.
My conclusions are speculative and meant to inform and support further design
of these systems. Like any other good theoretical design research, it handles slippery
problems in ways that are provisional, prototypical, and provocative—not necessarily
policy (yet). The story arc begins by tracing the political division of earthly territories—
land, sea, and air among them. Throughout history, each arrangement of those divisions expresses a particular and evolving geometry of sovereign space and a specific
topology of segmentation and jurisdiction, and because these orders are unfixed, they
are also redesignable.5 It becomes clear, for example, that the stability of geopolitical architectures based on the land-bounded nation-state as the indispensable unit of
sovereignty is continually undermined by its own successes and exceptions (and with
them, many political identities are as well). I argue that in order to account for the
real effects of planetary-scale computation and to make it accountable as a designable
platform, a decentering of some conventional ideas about political geographic norms
is necessary. Maps of horizontal global space can’t account for all the overlapping layers that create a thickened vertical jurisdictional complexity, or for how we already use
them to design and govern our worlds. Instead of lamenting all the exceptions to the
norm, hoping that they will get back in the box where they belong, perhaps it is time
to map a new normal. Toward conceiving an alternative geometry of political geography, looking forward more than backward, this book considers the model of The Stack.
I propose The Stack as a way that we might map political geography, but also for
how we understand the technologies that are making that geography. Planetary-scale
computation takes different forms at different scales—energy and mineral sourcing and grids; subterranean cloud infrastructure; urban software and public service

Introduction

5

privatization; massive universal addressing systems; interfaces drawn by the augmentation of the hand, of the eye, or dissolved into objects; users both over-outlined by
self-quantification and also exploded by the arrival of legions of sensors, algorithms,
and robots. Instead of seeing all of these as a hodgepodge of different species of computing, spinning out on their own at different scales and tempos, we should see them
as forming a coherent and interdependent whole. These technologies align, layer by
layer, into something like a vast, if also incomplete, pervasive if also irregular, software
and hardware Stack. To be clear, this figure of The Stack both does and does not exist as
such; it is both an idea and a thing; it is a machine that serves as a schema as much as
it is a schema of machines. It lets us see that all of these different machines are parts of
a greater machine, and perhaps the diagrammatic image of a totality that such a perspective provides would, as theories of totality have before, make the composition of
alternatives—including new sovereignties and new forms of governance—both more
legible and more effective. As the shape of political geography and the architecture of
planetary-scale computation as a whole, The Stack is an accidental megastructure, one
that we are building both deliberately and unwittingly and is in turn building us in its
own image. While it names the organization of a planetary-scale computing infrastructure, my purpose is to leverage it toward a broader program for platform design. In the
depiction of this incipient megastructure, we can see not just new machines but also
still-embryonic geopolitical institutions and social systems as well. For these, The Stack
is powerful and dangerous, both remedy and poison, a utopian and dystopian machine
at once (it can go either way, and as Buckminster Fuller said, it will be touch and go
until the last instant). As a model, The Stack is simultaneously a portrait of the system
we have but perhaps do not recognize, and an antecedent of a future territory, and with
both at hand, we hope to prototype the alien cosmopolitanisms these engender for us
and suggest to us.
Planetary-scale computation both distorts and reforms modern jurisdiction and
political geography and produces new forms of these in its own image. It perforates
and transcends some borders while introducing and re-thickening others at new scales
and in greater quantity. While this inaugurates new design problems, it does not
represent the introduction of design into political geography as such: design is
always already there. The frame of the nation-state as the core jurisdiction is a design—
deliberate and otherwise—of a geopolitical architecture derived from the partitioning
of planar geography, separating and containing sovereign domains as discrete, adjacent units among a linear and horizontal surface. That one particular modern model
is a specific and durable compositional lamination of territorial and governmental layers into one, but today as a design logic for political geography, it is less a monopoly
platform than it once was. It leaned on a consensus that was always a bit tenuous
and today demands attention and revisitation. We could trace this design back to,
among other defining events, the 1648 Peace Treaty of Westphalia, which formalized

6

Introduction

this particularly flattened political-cartographic diagram and set some terms for its subsequent normalization and partial universalization throughout the world. The effects
of this design extended not just to how political space would be formally represented
and enforced but also how the content of “the political” as a unique domain of human
action and ethics would be known. Some decades after Westphalia, Immanuel Kant
codified and expanded on the implications of its arrangements and gave it deeper philosophical leverage. He articulated “cosmopolitanism” as the polity of those who share
the surface of the earth’s crust as their locale and as a moral and legal federation of the
landed national units and of their citizens. The formal system of Westphalian states
did not resolve once and for all conflicts over law, land, and identity into this global
and self-encapsulated legal architecture, but instead invested in the state the standing
of the legitimate instrument of those conflicts (and, as importantly, over exceptions to
that legitimacy as well).
Today’s political geographic conflicts are often defined as exceptions to that normal model, and many are driven, enabled, or enforced in significant measure by planetary computation: byzantine international and subnational bodies, a proliferation
of enclaves and exclaves, noncontiguous states, diasporic nationalisms, global brand
affiliations, wide-scale demographic mobilization and containment, free trade corridors and special economic zones, massive file-sharing networks both legal and illegal,
material and manufacturing logistical vectors, polar and subpolar resource appropriations, panoptic satellite platforms, alternative currencies, atavistic and irredentist religious imaginaries, cloud data and social-graph identity platforms, big data biopolitics
of population medicine, equities markets held in place by an algorithmic arms race
of supercomputational trading, deep cold wars over data aggregation across state and
party lines, and so on. In relation to the incommensurate demands of diverse protocols, these rewrite and redivide the spaces of geopolitics in ways that are inclusive of
aerial volumes, atmospheric envelopes, and oceanic depths. In response, certain geopolitical modernities drift from the center of the frame, are obscured by the multiple
exposure image of competing claims over the same place, and are sometimes even
overcome by these effects.
Today the authority of states, drawn from the rough consensus of the Westphalian
political geographic diagram, is simultaneously never more entrenched and ubiquitous
and never more obsolete and brittle. In the emergence of The Stack, it is not that the
state declines per se, but that our contemporary condition is qualified both by a debordering perforation and liquefaction of this system’s ability to maintain a monopoly
on political geography, and by an overbordering, manifest as an unaccountable proliferation of new lines, endogenous frames, anomalous segments, medieval returns,
infomatic interiors, ecological externalities, megacity states, and more. These zones
fold and flip-flop on top of one another, interweaving into abstract and violent spatial
machines of uncanny jurisdictional intricacy. Borderlines are militarized as they are

Introduction

7

also punctured or ignored. However, the simultaneity of all this is only contradictory
at first blush. Debordering and overbordering both testify to the crisis of the Westphalian geographic design, and indeed of the force of law that would predicate the state’s
ability to convene and constitute sovereignty only in relation to that particular image.
The capacity of the state to enforce those same territorial claims is not simply undone;
indeed, it is also reinforced by the same processes of delinking sovereignty and geography that states themselves have innovated. The modern norm of political geography
is fracturing through its own radicalization and by its own hand, not just by the accumulation of violations to its authority. At the same time, the future of its governance,
and the designability of that future, is now, as it has been many times before, being
decided through encounters with incommensurate external challenges to its claimed
monopoly on geographic geometry. Such encounters sometimes produce genuinely
new things, and sometimes they produce what is merely consistent with what can be
enforced, and sometimes they produce things that are neither.
Recognizing this paradox raises more questions and possibly provides some leads.
What might account for its complexities and what topological imaginations might
allow us to reform it? At stake is more than a new way for states to operate or a new
set of technologies requiring governance; rather, it is a scale of technology that comes
to absorb functions of the state and the work of governance. Toward an answer, The
Stack model suggests both the means and ends of a specific kind of platform sovereignty. It demands that we understand the designability of geography in relation to the
designability of computation and to see the state (and other sovereign institutions) in
relation to both at once. This differs from how other political philosophies of technology have understood governance and machines. Max Weber’s sociological theories of
bureaucracy also described the state as a kind of machine, a vast apparatus for which
the instrumental rationality of inputs and outputs should guarantee predetermined
outcomes. Platforms, however, don’t operate according to such guarantees; they feed
on the indeterminacy of outcomes. Louis Althusser and other Western Marxists spoke
of the “state machine,” a more amorphously distributed ideological mechanism that
interpolated its subjects through their internalization of the time of capital. Platforms,
however, have much more varied relationships to nonstate forms of authority and
noncapitalist economies. As we’ll see, their totality is always adjacent to other totalities. Michel Foucault located “governmentality” more directly as the immanent discourses, techniques, and architectures that constitute the objectivity of the modern
subject.6 For Foucault, the state, as such, is only one site of governance among many
others and by no means the most central for understanding economies of power. Platforms are similar in this regard. Equally important for Foucault were scientific laboratories, daily routines in prisons, hospital quarantine protocols, psychiatric textbooks,
the design of dormitories according to particular lines of sight, the shape of a surgical
device according to an invented idea of a standard body, “the angle between two walls

8

Introduction

and its happy ending.”7 Here governance itself is articulated and configured through
the specific technologies and techniques with which it produces its own subjects and
objects. It may justify enforcement according to the content of laws, but for Foucault,
that governance is itself just as much invented by those techniques as the things that it
governs. It is an effect as much as it is a cause of how certain machines and mechanics
organize bodies over time.
One of the most important ways it does this is by seeing them in particular ways,
and we might say that governance in general evolves in relation to what it is technically
possible for it to see at any historical moment. If new means for perception and surveillance are made available (to see new spaces, new scales, new traces, new crimes), then
governance—and the state in particular—will conform itself to the vacuum opened up
by new vision machines and to the demands of whatever is now available to observe
and control. What James Scott calls “seeing like a state” is then not just a way to imagine the world as something demanding state governance through the intervention
of reason and interference of planning; it is also the ultimate effect of how increasingly powerful technologies of perception, sensing, detection, parsing, and processing all react together to enforce design and retrain governance in their own images.8
States and nonstate actors of all types compete directly not only over the invention
of vision machines that produce new spaces to claim (air space, electromagnetic spectrum, exabytes of mass-intercept data), but also dominion over those spaces once they
are mapped. The emergence of The Stack may represent this historical logic taken to an
extreme new maturity. It is not the “state as a machine” (Weber) or the “state machine”
(Althusser) or really even (only) the technologies of governance (Foucault) as much as
it is the machine as the state. Its agglomeration of computing machines into platform
systems not only reflects, manages, and enforces forms of sovereignty; it also generates
them in the first place. Just as for Foucault’s technologies, its mechanics are not representative of governance; they are governance. But unlike for Foucault’s archaeology, its
primary means and interests are not human discourse and human bodies but, rather,
the calculation of all the world’s information and of the world itself as information.
We, the humans, while included in this mix, are not necessarily its essential agents, and
our well-being is not its primary goal. After billions of years of evolution, complicated
heaps of carbon-based molecules (that includes us) have figured out some ways to subcontract intelligence to complicated heaps of silicon-based molecules (that includes
our computers). In the long run, this may be for the better—and maybe not.
2. An Accidental Megastructure
This accidental megastructure, this machine that is also a “state,” is not the result
of some master plan, revolutionary event, or constitutional order. It is the accumulative residue of contradictions and oppositions that arose to address other more local

Introduction

9

problems of computing systems design. In the success and failure of those attempts, The
Stack congeals, but do we know where and how? Contemporary geopolitics, and the
largely confused commentary on it with which we muddle along, are knotted through
and through. We see it in a politics of radial transparency aligned with another politics
of radical privacy, in journalists’ self-congratulation at the use of social media in the
Arab Spring as supposedly outlining an anterior stratum of crowds and power (absent
in their coverage of the shock economies of Haiti, Pakistan, Nigeria, and Louisiana,
for example), in how Wikipedia formalizes taxonomic consensus from a heteroglossia
of interests and how WikiLeaks inverted the ocular and occult body of the state, or in
how Google cloud services both circumvent and circumscribe state authority in China
and in how much of China’s direct perception of computational supply chains is invisible to Californian search engines. Both events and pseudoevents are plentiful and it’s
hard to know what signals a new situation and what is trivial: the Google Earth standoff between Costa Rica and Nicaragua, Prism and Data.Gov, hyperbolic packet-routing
topologies, Dot-P2P and OpenDNS, net neutrality and the golden shield, downloadable
guns 3D printed out of synthetic biopolymers paid for with Bitcoins, the National Security Agency (NSA) versus Unit 6139, NSA versus Anonymous, Anonymous versus Syrian Electronic Army, NSA versus Syrian Electronic Army versus ISIL versus FSB (Federal
Security Service of the Russian Federation) versus North Korea versus Samsung versus
Apple versus European Parliament, and on and on. Which of these situations scales well
into a general lesson and which actually obscures the critical junctures? What will be
the long-term ramifications of the privatization of the common intellect by search and
social network platforms on our ability to self-govern, or toward what form of governance do they already serve us up? The tangle of these questions is not exclusive to what
is historically new. Emergent secular geographies (such as cloud computing, ubiquitous
computing, emergent ethnoscapes, minoritarian psychogeographies of user-interfaces)
may appear in the guise of archaic sacred geographies (such as Dar al-Islam, Christendom, Greater Judea) against which the domain of secular states was formulated. These
compete with states not only for claims over legitimate violence, but also claims over
legitimate citizenship and the capacity to delineate borders. Sometimes the emergent
defines the archaic by opposition, and sometimes it is an essential collaborator.
We describe this by a consolidation of cultural and technical systems, a realignment of institutions and discourses, and attempts to recognize and engineer their
effects and accidents. That is, the design horizon for each layer of this Stack must
be considered in terms of both what it accomplishes as an ideal technology and,
perhaps more important, how its undesigned accidents characterize its real outcomes.
For example, in the slippery redefinitions of citizenship and sovereignty in a cloud
computing era, what referent of last resort can we rely on? Human rights? End-user
agreements? Are we obligated to every service embedded in every software-enabled
object or surface we might encounter? Is there a hierarchy of these? What if effective

10

Introduction

citizenship in a polity were granted not according to categorical juridical identity,
but as a shifting status derived from any user’s generic relationship to the machinic
systems that bind that polity to itself? In other words, if the interfaces of the city
itself address everyone as a “user,” then perhaps one’s status as a user is what really
counts. The right to address and be addressed by the polity would be understood as
some shared and portable relationship to common infrastructure. Properly scaled and
codified, this by itself would be a significant (if also accidental) accomplishment of
ubiquitous computing. From this perhaps we see less the articulation of citizenship
for any one city, enclosed behind its walls, but of a “citizen” (Is that even still the
right word?) of the global aggregate urban condition, a “citizen-user” of the vast, discontiguous city that striates Earth, built not only of buildings and roads but also of
perplexing grids and dense, fast data archipelagos. Could this aggregate “city” wrapping the planet serve as the condition, the grounded legitimate referent, from which
another, more plasmic, universal suffrage can be derived and designed? Could this
composite city-machine, based on the terms of mobility and immobility, a public ethics of energy and electrons, and unforeseeable manifestations of data sovereignty (various parts looking like chora, demos, agora, polis, dromos, and technics) provide for some
kind of ambient homeland? If so, for whom and for what? If it could, or if it already
is in some way, then our regular categories and criteria are not describing it very well
for us. This is perhaps because it is not planned but an accident of the process. Adding processing power to legacy models of political sovereignty first inflates them grotesquely and then, in time, as the generative infrastructure of another geography fills
up different frames and replaces them with irregular new forms and formats, all those
legacy models start to look Greek to us.
These “accidents” form the basis of many of our current geopolitical conflicts and
conundrums. The first Sino-Google conflict of 2009, during which Google “pulled out”
of the world’s largest Internet market in response to demands for state monitoring and
control of search results as well as the hacking of its servers by Chinese state-sponsored
teams, may well be the opening crack in new kind of war over who or what governs
society in the first place. That war is less between two superpowers (or proxies for
them) than between two irreconcilable logics of how polities and publics are convened
according to what sovereign spaces. One of these sees “the Internet” as an extension of
the body of the state (or subservient to it) and another sees “the Internet” as a living,
quasi-autonomous (if privately controlled and profited) transterritorial civil society
that produces, defends, and demands rights on its own. For this, Google is a nonstate
actor operating with the force of a state, but unlike modern states, it is not defined
by a single specific territorial contiguity. It is a US-headquartered corporation but also
a transnational actor that has taken on many traditional functions of nation-states.
While Google is as reliant on real physical infrastructure—its data centers are by no
means virtual—that physicality is more dispersed and distributed than partitioned and

Introduction

11

circumscribed. But this opposition is not simply states versus markets, or West versus
East. The implication is not another prophecy of the declining state withering away
into the realm of pure network, but to the contrary: the state’s ongoing redefinition
is now undertaken in relation to network geographies that it can neither contain nor
be contained by. From here, the practical geopolitical design issues only get more, not
less, complex. What, really, are to be the national rights of mobile subjects in a cloudbased society? Can you be bound to the data laws of your passport country no matter
where you go? Or can your cloud platform follow you, and you follow it such that
your platform constitutes your primary sovereign “territory” no matter where you go?
Should it? Or should individual servers fly the flag of a certain state and disseminate
data according to those laws, even if the server may be across the world? Or, instead,
should the particular data laws of any one particular geographic site try to construct
and contain the laws of flow on one particular spot, regardless of the sovereign origins
of sender or receiver? The last mile trumps all? All of these options are counterintuitive, so what are the alternatives? What if the server farms are outside territorial waters
altogether, like Google’s patented offshore data centers, which for sensible energy-conservation reasons would also put the physical infrastructure of the global cloud outside
regular territorial jurisdiction (discussed in more detail in the Cloud chapter). It is not
my hypothesis that planetary computation will bring the accidental of alien political
geography, because it already has. The design problems require speculation but are
not hypothetical. They demand that we engage a response that is as inventive as it is
ineluctable.
The architecture of this model treats these overlapping layers, claims, and networks
not as exceptions to the normal rule but as the basis of an emergent order. The Stack,
as examined here, comprises six interdependent layers: Earth, Cloud, City, Address, Interface, User. Each is considered on its own terms and as a dependent layer within a larger
architecture, and each is drafted from the superimposed image of the geographic and
computational machines we now inhabit and the ones we might yet make. Each layer
is understood as a unique technology capable of generating its own kinds of integral
accidents, which, perhaps counterintuitively, may ultimately bind that larger architecture into a more stable order. These layers are not just computational. As much
as it is made from computational forms (multiplexed fiber-optic cables, data centers,
databases, systems standards and protocols, urban-scale networks, embedded systems,
universal addressing tables), The Stack is also composed of social, human, and concrete
forces (energy sources, gestures, effects, self-interested maneuvers, dashboards, cities
and streets, rooms and buildings, physical and virtual envelopes, empathies and enemies). These hard and soft systems intermingle and swap roles, some becoming relatively “harder” or “softer” according to seemingly arcane conditions.9 The Stack comes
from both equilibrium and emergence, one oscillating into the other in undeciphered
and unaccounted-for rhythms, stabilizing and destabilizing the same component for

12

Introduction

sometimes mismatched purposes. What is its state condition, and, literally for governance, what kind of machine that is a state does it provide for?
The scenario described in the chapters to follow, and appearing before us in the
real world, can be summarized as one in which Users,10 human or nonhuman, are
cohered in relation to Interfaces, which provide synthetic total images of the Addressed
landscapes and networks of the whole, from the physical and virtual envelopes of
the City, to the geographic archipelagos of the Cloud and the autophagic consumption of Earth’s minerals, electrons, and climates that power all of the above. The most
complex paths through these layers may displace well-established forms of human–
machine-infrastructure interaction, perhaps so well established that entire cities were
designed to accommodate them. This may insert machine control at almost any point,
amplifying or diverting human control over any machine in which the User happens to be installed, or even of the whole infrastructural landscape in which those
machines swarm together. For example, the integrated design of driverless cars includes
navigation interfaces, computationally intensive and environmentally aware rolling
hardware, and street systems that can stage the network effects of hundreds of thousands speeding robots at once. The next stable form of the “automobile” (a description
that will become perhaps more and more accurate) may be as a mobile Cloud platform
inside of which Users navigate the City layer of a larger Stack according to augmented
scenery Interfacial overlays and powered by grids of electrons as well as bits. Planetaryscale computation involves the whole Earth from which silica, steel, and all manner
of conflict minerals are drawn. Computation is not virtual; it is deeply physical event,
and The Stack has an enormous appetite for molecules of interest and distributing
them into our pockets, our laps, and our landfills. The chemistries and the terawatts
that will feed The Stack, and us through it, force us to reckon that the ponderous
heaviness of Cloud computing will be a key driver of geopolitical frictions to come. We
are taking a high-stakes risk with the development of smart grids and the energy appetites per terminus they will enable. Will the platform efficiencies of The Stack provide
the lightness necessary for a new subtractive modernity, an engine of a sustainable
counterindustrialization, or will its appetite finally suck everything into its collapsing
cores of data centers buried under mountains: the last race, the climate itself the last
enemy?
In the figure of The Stack, we see not one totality but the production of multiple and
incongruous totalities, some of which are “interfacial regimes,” some are superimposed
landscapes of Addresses, and others are interwoven Cloud and state geometries. These
geometries both draw and draw on the vertical platform of The Stack, and in doing so
may also displace existing geographies with several alternatives at once. Perhaps these
culminate in the apotheosis of Anthropocenic industrialism and perhaps they provide larval scripts for a post-Anthropocenic alternative, or both, or perhaps something
much less decisive and dramatic. Our sights are not trained on how The Stack might

Introduction

13

hasten the messianic arrival of some seamless full-spectrum computational end of history, but how its gnashing and grating juxtapositions generate peculiar new spaces,
normal enclaves, and how those exceptions are instructive as ways of deliberately reorganizing the world. Put differently, treatments of each of these six layers work with
a particular caveat, that is Paul Virilio’s axiom that the invention of any new kind of
technology is also simultaneously the invention of a new kind of accident.11 This holds
true for the emergence of planetary computation and its Stack, as much as it does for
the forging of aluminum and airplane crashes, set theory and stock market crashes,
and incandescent light bulbs and climate change. Each individual layer promises its
own range of possible accidents as it abuts its neighbors, and in some way each of the
six layers is presented as a technology for accidents. Each is described in terms of both
how it resolves the emergent accidental megastructure of The Stack into one and how
the essential accident of each layer, and of the combined whole, points toward very
different kinds of geosocial relations and geopolitical systems, perhaps especially those
determined not by today’s technology but by whatever technological regime will come
after planetary-scale computation.
3. Blur and Accident
We start with questions that are as slippery as what they interrogate. In an age of planetary-scale computation, what is “sovereignty” and what is the future political geography, especially as the former is separated from the latter? How would the answers
influence how we draw and divide up who and what goes where, and what shape
the maps are that could do this? When geography becomes geolocation, who or what
truly occupies any given place? Its owner, its user, the platform that makes it useful to
either? Again, how is one person governed when platforms of governance see her as a
User at a particular layer of a whole more than as a formal citizen? What freedoms of
movement and freedoms from movement can she claim? What constitutes a constitution when the terms of engagement with other publics, near and far, both human and
nonhuman, are codified into visual interfaces—images that are also tools? How can
these platforms be redesigned to organize alternative economics, geopolitics, ecologies,
philosophies, and even models of historical time? As it is conditioned by globalization,
localization, and intermediate zonal regionalisms, by spaces absorbed by networks and
networks absorbed by citadels, will some other, unknown political geometry come to
enact and enforce the necessary partitions and brackets (border, wall, law, identity)
that could program the world according to its alternative plan and plan it according to
its program? Who and what gets to be the citizen-subject-User-agent of that program?
Finally, to Clinton’s half-formed question, what is the architecture of the emergent
geopolitics of this software society? What alignments, components, foundations, and
apertures?

14

Introduction

We need ways to account for the intersecting complexities of computational globalization, its thickened geographies, its mysterious weaving of geometries of governance
and territory, seen on their own terms, not as transgressions of some other system.
The emergence of computation as global infrastructure contributes to an ungluing and
delamination of land, governance, and territory, one from another.12 Accordingly, sovereignty is now less guaranteed by the conceptual resolution of the flattened geopolitical plane as offered by the Westphalian nation-state system, but that does not mean
that takes leave. As said, that particular compromise on the delimited monopoly over
sovereign space is unbuttoned from its mooring, perhaps only to be refastened even
tighter in another way. Indeed the appetite of the state is rejuvenated by the same processes of computation that delink modern sovereignty and geography and challenge
that particular consensual framework. The state’s own future is to be decided through
its own negotiation of encounters with the challenges posed by planetary-scale computation to its geographic and jurisdictional legacies. The state continues by extending
up and down into the new scales offered by multiple interdependent layers of The
Stack, which sometimes do not blend into one form, but rather produce unresolved
compound images and unresolved compound worlds, jurisdictions, frontlines, and
boundaries. The gaps opened up by this rotation, a simultaneous coming undone and
refortification, is where the reprogrammability of things plays out. The touchpoints
between these layers make substitute locations and addresses, variously new and primeval; they are translations, wet with life, descriptive and consistent with what can
be repeated over and again as governance. Squinting hard to make out the contours
as they slip and slide off the map, we realize that only a blur provides for an accurate
picture of what is going on now and to come. For better or worse, blur is what they are
and what they do. Our description of a system in advance of its appearance maps what
we can see but cannot articulate, on the one hand, versus what we know to articulate
but cannot yet see, on the other. This oscillation between the real-but-as-yet-unnamed
and the imagined-but-as-yet-not-real—this blur between them—might sustain the necessary challenges to the imagination and even enforce what it conceives, a giving way
to compound images and sectional perspectives: to stacks.
For this investigation, that compound image is articulated through the lens of computation operating at planetary scale (which it does very unevenly). But this is also
exactly what makes the question of that future more difficult to ask with precision
because it is also too easy to ask.13 To say that the future of geopolitics is a function
of the future of computation is to risk saying nothing at all or, worse, to repeat everything that shouldn’t have been said in the first place. Isn’t the conflation of globalization with “digital,” under a rubric that cajoles allegiance to a computational teleology,
today’s quintessential nonthought, a mere sequencing of the most obvious into something that stands for history because it renders the mundane for us at a historical
scale? Yes. Yet if looking from the future at the present instead of the present for the

Introduction

15

future, we were to consider that exact situation from the virtual perspective of a world
already utterly realigned, we would see plainly that a fundamental and computationally determined realignment of our world is already well underway. Where it goes is
anything but settled, and today’s official futurism may have little to contribute when
all is said and done. We can, however, say a few things about where it goes with some
confidence. This future-antecedent revision of political geography owes itself to a calibrated repetition, a desimulation, of the blur noted above in at least two ways. First,
it is realized within a tangible geographic agency of material computation, a physical
information geology, that is already at work, already spoken about ad nauseam and
so therefore escapes adequate description; second, it is today latent in some possible
articulation that could give it formal composability in advance. We can hope that even
as the blur confounds, that we designate it further so that it can design us in the course
of its own articulation. It may be that our predicament is that we cannot design the
next political geography of planetary computation until it more fully designs us in its
own image or, in other words, that the critical dependence of the future’s futurity is
that we are not yet available for it! It is less that the contemporary hyperbole for computational globalization is a lie, that it doesn’t truthfully describe what it purports to
map, but that what it maps doesn’t yet exist. The difficulty in formulating a sufficient
geopolity is a function of both what we think we know it has done (but don’t actually
know because it hasn’t done that yet) and of what it has done and will do (but which
we don’t know and actually don’t know how to know). Unfortunately, for learning how
to know it, direct amplification in the intensity and resolution of our answers to the
inevitably wrong questions will not help us.
Every thing is, it seems, a stakeholder and is at stake. The consequences hinge on
what is the most difficult challenge to our uncertain competency to redesign our own
geogovernance, that is, the fragility of our climatic and ecological commonwealth.
The bedraggled UN Climate Change conferences underscore why intersovereign federations have a limited ability to enforce deep transformation through legal consensus.
The ecological crisis will likely necessitate the formulation of new scales of bioregional
jurisdiction (both smaller and larger than a state), new modes of calculating energy
(quantifying, computing, distributing, visualizing a polity of electrons), and new forms
of networked geopolitics (that can represent both urban megasettlements as well several hundred million migrants with equal representational facility). States and sovereignty as we know them may be ill-suited to these tasks, and so the option may
prove to be, quite literally, adapt or die. And these are just the problems we know, the
known-unknowns.
The project to be taken up sees politics as infrastructure, systems as law, totalities
as site condition, supply chains as ecologies, and energy as money. Each of these, and
each layer of The Stack drawn from them, is a unique but dependent logic of design
and governance. Most of the unfamiliar questions arise from problems that cannot be

16

Introduction

answered in isolation and cannot be properly addressed by extrapolating and extruding
familiar models from past modern eras or by presuming that the past is actually in the
past (despite the earnest protestations of some who would say they can).14 What maps,
what media of exchange and equivalence, what agency of synthetic objects, which
currencies for ecological economics, what ethical appetite of risk or promiscuity, what
bargains with violence are necessary? These can’t only be decided by philosophical discourse or solved by engineering, nor can we engage the blur that makes them partially
legible to us without also deploying both at once. Opportunistic variations of thinking
and making must be enrolled, all at once and in dissonant combinations, braided one
into another (just as their subject matter already is). We may not have to wait long to
find out which way things will break. Geographies that were comfortable and doxic
are now transient and alien, inhabited uncannily. But even as strange geographies corrugate, fracture, and smear worldly scale and tempo, the ground isn’t somehow evaporated into virtual information flux; to the contrary, we are brought to a certain end of
nonplace. For this, a different kind of placefulness is reestablished, one that is not the
organic inverse of artificial abstraction, but an experience of place as one resonant scale
within a much larger telescoping between local and global consolidations.15 That reestablishment is not a generalized secessionism or irredentism, a natural regrounding,
or transcendent escape into technological raptures. It is designation, a composition, a
design aesthetics, and a projective ethics of pan-infrastructure deployed for a geopolitical reality that cannot possibly untangle material from information, materialism from
informationalism, earth from sky.
Keeping the image of that reality in mind, all the while looking askance at the
idiot predicaments of today, we can well wonder if our current faculties of analysis
and making, our hideous languages, are capable of authoring any lasting alternatives.
Perhaps ours is not a world of information but a wall of noise, a screeching mélange of
incompatible equations into which we have no real choice but to enter into directly:
scrambled territories, institutions, constitutions, sovereignties, citizenships, hardwares, softwares, protocols, interfaces, databases, patterns, platforms, cities, muscles,
skins, organs, failing presumptions, exotic refrains, domains, settlements, penultimate
boundaries—or, better yet, directly into the forms-to-come, for which each of these legacies is just an ancestral ante-image. There is less forward and backward than entropy
and negentropy, oblivion and not oblivion, imminent or deferred utopia. As such, any
design authorship must understand that the dynamics at work now are—for better and
worse—simultaneously and interchangeably both futuristic and archaic, at once both
technocratic and theocratic. The Westphalian-Kantian diagram of the nation-state is
attacked from both the front and the rear (another blurring). At the same time that we
ponder oceanic financial archipelagos that would game the speed of light by locating
offshore trading sites that optimize the movement of pulses between trading centers,
and through which the incremental value of a commodity is determined literally by

Introduction

17

its location in the earth’s light cone,16 we also watched, back in 2008, religious fundamentalist groups attacking Mumbai with Google Earth maps, satellite phones, stolen
SIM cards. As some would launch the secular alter-cosmopolitanism-to-come, others
lay the groundwork for a cloud-based neofeudalism: Visigoths with iPads, barbarian
theological microstates with thriving biotech and nanotech industries (like California,
perhaps). Supercomputing does not inoculate us from feudalism and from superstition, but it can perhaps provide for their opposite, that is, a futurity, and a futurism,
without guarantees, only plasticity.17 And so the accidents keep piling up. The jurisdictions are more interwoven. The geometry of political geography is only more complex,
especially in that it seems to have no outside, no “free space,” to delimit itself against.
Our accidental megastructure is more plural, more contradictory, more composite, and
more polyscalar. But if so, then while Virilio’s axiom holds, and the invention of any
new kind of technology is also necessarily and simultaneously the invention of a new
kind of accident, it is true that the opposite holds as well: the accident also produces a
new technology.

The Nomos of the Cloud

But historical forces wait for science, no more than Columbus waited for Copernicus. Each time,
through the impulse of new historical forces, new lands and seas enter into the horizon of the
collective consciousness, the spaces of historical existence are transformed. At that moment arise
new measurements and dimensions of political-historical activity, new sciences, new orders, new
life or reborn peoples. Seneca: the hot Indus and the cold Araxes converge, Persians drink from
the Elbe and Rhine. Thetis will reveal new worlds. And Thule will no longer be the outer edge of
the Earth.
—Carl Schmitt1
The space of the globe is a circle of circles. Time is imprisoned in the solar system where one may
distinguish circles of circles by transfer, rotation, by helices and spirals.
—Michel Serres2

We began with an architectural question and then worked toward a political theory.
In this chapter, we begin with a political theory and work up toward a technological
predicament. As argued, The Stack emerges not only as a global technical system but
also as geopolitical geography. It is able to do so because it also emerges from modern
political space and its capacities to site, subdivide, and occupy “new worlds.” First, we
consider the geographic history of sovereignty through (and against) the notorious
German legal theorist Carl Schmitt’s notion of nomos. For Schmitt, the physical incision of the line into the earth precedes the empty abstractions of mathematized grids
and naval liquidity and is essential to any proper sovereign form. We will examine
Schmitt’s binary opposition between the land and the sea, the physical and the virtual,
with regard to The Stack, first to put it to use and ultimately to break it apart and likely
leave it behind. In the chapter following, we define the institutional logics of platforms
in general by considering their technical processes as political technologies. We then
consider examples of how platforms (specifically stacks) have been employed to compose economies and societies in their own image. Finally we will examine the specific
layers and logics of The Stack as developed in subsequent chapters.

20

The Nomos of the Cloud

4. Dividing Sovereignty
In starting with and from political theory in this first part, it is important to acknowledge in advance that “sovereignty” is positioned as a question, not as a given conclusion. The implication is not that software is new and sovereignty is timeless, thereby
leading one to ask how sovereignty now works through software, but rather that both
are now mutually contingent and that the work of software at a global scale itself produces unfamiliar sorts of sovereignties. Even so, the many connotations of sovereignty
are highly contested in political philosophy, and this book is unlikely to temper this
and may disappoint anyone looking for the definitive explication of the concept.
Even so, we can say that in the most prosaic sense, state sovereignty is drawn out by
rules of an international system that is itself guaranteed by the federation of states.
According to this, a state would have a right to the legitimate exercise of control and
governance within an exclusive geographic domain, usually of land, including certain monopolies over legitimate violence and the recognition of and by international
law. This arrangement is predominant but incomplete. It is characterized, at the very
least, by its own continuous breaching. In relation to this system are other several specific sovereignties in play: the legal sovereignty of states recognizing one another; an
interdependence sovereignty of stable global flows of resources and capital; domestic
sovereignty, and the state’s authority over its own internal mechanisms and institutions; and Westphalian sovereignty, that states have the right to separately determine
their own domestic structures of authority.3 The Westphalian mode is, as I’ve suggested, also predicated on a particular and arbitrary geographic design of political
space defined primarily as zones of land, named by and as states. Sovereign decision
has, of course, been a focus of renewed attention, from Jean Bodin’s definition of the
sovereign as the absolute and perpetual power of a commonwealth through to the
more Hobbesian definition of the sovereign as “he who decides on the exception.”4
The exception is that which is on the face of it undecidable by the law, but which the
sovereign assumes the right to adjudicate nevertheless. The sovereign is he who has
the power to suspend the regularity of the law and issue enforcement into the indeterminate state of this “emergency.” Giorgio Agamben’s reading of Carl Schmitt moved
this “decisionism” close to the primitive core of political authority (particularly after
9/11, when irregular jurisdictions and executive actions were announced regularly as
the new normal).5 His work also convened a lively discourse on sovereignty, including
resistance to its forms, in relation to constituted and constitutive violence, drawing
heavily on Walter Benjamin’s 1934 essay, “A Critique of Violence,” as well as Agamben’s own employment of Schmitt’s terminology to identify the camp (specifically the
concentration camp) as “the nomos of the Modern.”6 Sovereignty here is not limited
to the work of states. In his later-career lectures on biopolitics at Collège de France,
Foucault outlined his idiosyncratic history of neoliberalism, which for Foucault was

The Nomos of the Cloud

21

itself a unique subspecies of capitalism. He argued that one of the things that makes
neoliberalism unique is that markets do not operate in conjunction with or in conflict
with sovereign states, but rather that sovereignty is itself shifted from states into markets. For sovereign markets, rights of economic exchange supersede the governance of
public order at the level of the individual and the collective.7 Abstracted calculation
supporting the strategic financialization of assets, both real and speculative, takes on
new importance, and so at least in this regard, the historical emergence planetaryscale computation and neoliberalism are intertwined. However, as we examine in
some detail with regard to platform sovereignty, that pairing is neither requisite nor
inevitable.
For The Stack’s sovereign products, the decision over the exception remains crucial in several ways, including in relation to where and when the law is suspended
on behalf of the drama of violence, but also where and when boundaries of Westphalian subdivisions have jurisdictional preeminence versus other spatial orders. Most
importantly, it is the reversibility of the exception that makes it so fraught; it is at once
outside the law yet determined by the authority of law itself and available for retroactive normalization at any time. For The Stack (and for other orders), this may work
through reversibility of geographic lines of segmentation, gathering an interior at one
moment and guarding against an exteriority in the next. Those segmentations may
divide physical space or separate layers in a larger machine, and from this conjunction, we can trace an infrastructural sovereignty that is produced less by formal law
than by the shared physical postures of political subjects in relation to common infrastructure. Within that broader framework, we can also identify platform sovereignty as
a still immature combination of legally articulated political subjectivity (one sometimes determined by geographic position and sometimes not) and an infrastructural
sovereignty produced in relation to the platform infrastructures of planetary-scale
computation, regardless of whether these are privately or publicly owned. We’ll see
that platform sovereignty operates within territories that are composed of intersecting lines, some physical and some virtual, and for this, deciding exceptions is no less
critical. The exceptions to be decided, however, are over what geographies those lines
describe and what conditions they inscribe. Is one side or the other the inside or outside? Is this a camp or enclave?
Modern state polities are defined as interior to their own circumscribing geographic
partition, and their sovereignty is produced in the fragile image of that line’s stability,
even as that line remains reversible (all extrastate actors rely on that inversion and its
convolutions). In the end, this economy of reversible partitions supersedes the integrity of external and internal borders, such that any polity is always an incomplete
complex of smaller subpolities, defined for itself according to its own private exceptions, both inward and outward-facing: capital cities, special economic zones, overseas
territories, embassies, local ordinances, and so on. Even with these buffers, the stability

22

The Nomos of the Cloud

of state polity is always in question, because to the extent that the state suppresses its
original constituting violence (war, revolution, settler colonialism), all future agents of
subsequent exceptional violence against that state become ghosts of those first rites of
legal absolution and self-exception, their most exacting patriots in a way. But the political work of the geographic line and its violent reversal precedes and exceeds formal
states into both their past and their future.
Consider that with the first agriculture also came more permanent settlement
patterns, more formal authority structures, as well as the compelling fortification of
place, cordoning it off through symbolic boundaries and by real walls and bunkers.
The zone of habitation more forcefully encircles itself, now less a territory on an open
plain (or plane) than one gathered into a proto-urban interior. With agricultural settlement as the driver, it is food—those parts of the world that we ourselves interiorize through ingestion and digestion—that guarantees this biopolitical economy of
space. The digestion cycle envelops inhabitants into themselves; over time, a city consumes its inhabitants as the inhabitants consume the city (and in this way at least, all
settlements are cannibalistic). The boundary lines that define the inside of that neolithic biopolitical economy are inscribed walls that outline and absorb what is wanted
into its own corpus, filtering out what is not. As these partitions are membranes
between the inside and the outside of a real social body, they are also skins, and it
is in relation to the sensibility, intelligence, and vulnerability of skins and surfaces
that these systems govern movements between enclosure and mobilization. In time,
urban economies of eating and not eating, and including and excluding, will multiply and diversify such skins, deploying some as abstracted infrastructures and others as exposed flesh to be disciplined, sacrificed, capitalized, augmented, consumed
over again. But for all that, it is still undecidable in advance what will finally constitute the interior or the exterior of any linear boundary, and so a specific sovereignty
of that decision must necessarily be invoked, implicitly or explicitly, and even programmed and automated. Lines (and surfaces) provide tension by setting opposition
between the negative spaces to each side (and inside and out), but they cannot ever
fully control how either side is charged in relation to the other at any given moment:
which one is dominant and which is subordinate, which is gathered in and which
is excluded. This holds equally true for Stack partitions, both spatial and technical,
such as City grids locking off bound cells from the linear flow, or Interface surfaces
drawing together Users and systems, negotiating on the fly who and what is driving
any interaction. While this primordial dynamic remains essential for the apparently
irregular geographies of The Stack, we will see that platform sovereignty also relies on
genuinely novel developments emerging through the reversibility of “lines” that are
equally geographic and technological, folding the world in and out and up and down
its layers, over and over again.

The Nomos of the Cloud

23

5. Over (and under) the Line
Globalization both destabilizes and enforces borders, tethering retronationalisms and
technological integration into the same contradictory dramas, populated by state and
nonstate actors, czarists and androids, switching sides without moving an inch. Consider this odd and perhaps quintessential episode. During the Yugoslavian civil war
of the 1990s, a squad of Serbian paramilitaries had captured a large group of Bosnian
Muslims and held them in open-air prison camps. Now-famous photographs and film
footage of these detainees, standing behind barbed wire looking out at the camera, horrified the world and mobilized opinion against the Serbian nationalist campaign and
perhaps in favor of military intervention as well. The image of concentration camps,
now again in Europe, crossed some red line and triggered demand for action. The Serbs
claimed, however, that the global interpretation of the footage was all wrong—backward in fact.8 According to them it was the photographer who was “inside” the camp,
looking “out” at the curious Bosnians who had gathered around the perimeter fence
to look in on him. This claim (albeit decided to be false in British court) demonstrates
how easily such lines can invert themselves when an inversion suits the strategic perspective at hand. The line may be drawn on the ground as clear as clear can be, but
the quality of the space that it draws—what is inside and what is outside, and who or
what governs either side—is always in question (especially for those who die on one
side of the wire). As the utopia/dystopia of the Berlin Wall (known as the Anti-Fascist
Protection Wall in East Germany) also made clear, the camp and the bunker, detention
and the enclave, are inversions of the same architectural form. One is an architecture
of internalization and the other of externalization, but they share the same material
profile. While one works to contain the danger within its walls, the other draws the
same physical partition to keep the world at bay and expelled outside its safety membrane. Any exceptionality of the camp is actually exceptional not only because it is
authorized by a sovereign decision that is both inside and outside the law, but also by
a preceding decision to differentiate that enclosure from its own double, the bunker.
Each is built into the other and their shared reversible design; the outside-in camp is
not the only figure of this nomos of the modern as the inside-out bunker is an equally
essential posture taken in relation to the same line. We will consider how the flip-flop
of one into the other can be normalized and even automated by platforms and how the
“exception” of linear reversibility itself becomes unexceptional.9
First, we need to recognize how different kinds of lines, segmenting and generating different geometries, accumulate to realize different kinds of geopolitical effects.
Schmitt has more than a little to say about this. Drawing the world is a work in progress. In Ptolemaic cosmology, the Earth was kept under a crystalline bubble, dividing
two worlds, ours on the inside of this glass vitrine and one on the outside, the heavens
looking in at us. From the fifteenth and sixteenth century claims on the New World,

24

The Nomos of the Cloud

to longitudinal zones derived from Greenwich mean time, to the subdivision of broadcast spectrum, modern geopolitics is always based on a particular and arbitrary compositional alignment of territorial and governmental layers into a particular architecture:
no topography without topology. Lines that are linked, folded, and looped become a
frame, keeping things in or out, but like all other frames, they also present a certain
section of the world and put it on display. The modern nation-state is itself also function of a cartographic projection that conceives the Earth as a horizontal plane filled
with various allotments of land in which individual sovereign domains are circumscribed by jagged lines. Some are drawn as irregular hexagons (like France), some are
regularized rectangles (like Colorado), some are discontiguous clusters of spiky circles
(like Hawaii), but all these shapes are derived from the basic topology of loops. Also
there is no geography without first topology, and so as we’ll see, also no nomos without topos: no stable geopolitical order without an underlying architecture of spatial
subdivision. This loop topology is normative but not mandatory. As we know, other
subdivisions of the Earth are not only possible; their lines already proliferate. While
some lines and frames are more physically tangible than others, for the political geography of The Stack, it is the physicality of abstraction that is at the center of things. As
a kind of master architecture (in the making), The Stack model is also perhaps also a
contemporary version of what Schmitt called the nomos, and perhaps it is what retires
the Schmittian nomos altogether. This slippery concept refers to the historically evolving structure of the world order (more specifically for him, an Earth-order) and the
corresponding partitioning of political space according to which sovereign entities are
constituted. Is there a nomos of the Cloud? We may conclude that The Stack is the
nomos of our moment, or a better grasp on the architecture of The Stack may establish
that there is no real nomos after all.
My extended discussion of Schmitt and this term, nomos, needs some explanation.
My interest is not to make a new contribution to the already well-trod domain of
Schmitt studies or to suggest that we cannot develop a practical theory of sovereignty
and political geography without first steering clear passage through his thought and
legacy. Instead, some of Schmitt’s problematic concepts are used for both the particular things that they may illuminate and also for what is to be learned by what they
obscure, and how and why they do both of these. In this sense, his concepts stand
in for other related perspectives that deserve criticism, specifically those that begin
from and end with a basic distinction between the physical and virtual when trying
to make sense of computation and space, let alone geography. Implicit or explicit,
this lazy association of analog systems, with physics and nature, and digital systems,
with artifice and artificiality, dulls and confuses our debates about technology in ways
we cannot afford. A corollary to this is a discourse on “the political” that fetishizes
oppositional antagonisms, and another that can comprehend technology only as an
instrument or topic of governance, and not as its actual form.10 The nomos, however,

The Nomos of the Cloud

25

is one of his concepts (“exception” is another) that might be twisted and reused in
such a way as to force it toward very different conclusions that he intended. But what
is nomos exactly?
In his 1950 work, The Nomos of the Earth in the International Law of Jus Publicum
Europaeum, the legal theorist offered a sweeping history of Western geopolitical architectures. The work focuses on how Roman, British, and Germanic legal empires drew
the geometry of territory—specifically European territory—into a stable of political
geographic orders from which spatial sovereignty over land, sea, and air was derived.11
Schmitt defined nomos as “the Greek word for the first measure of all subsequent measures, for the first land appropriation understood as the first partite and classification
of space, for the primeval division and distribution, is nomos.”12 It is a both a structural
logic in accordance with the primal first act of territorial inscription that gives rise to
its subsequent formalization; it is a making of a territorial order through the execution of a territorial claim and physical occupation that precedes it. It also refers to a
set of “principles governing human conduct” regarding war, space, and governance,
but Schmitt makes use of nomos to suggest something both more concrete and transcendental than the abstractions of law. Nomos is described as prior to every legal,
economic, and social order;13 it is constituted by appropriation, distribution, and production, and only through this can it move from the particular to the universal: from
arbitrary territorial capture, to representations of spatial delineation and to a geopolitical order. It is at once a physical oppositional arrangement, a discursive order, and an
organic naturalization of this. Fredric Jameson offers another interpretation on Schmitt
when he writes,
The concept of the nomos is a periodizing and structural category (whose family likenesses, besides one to the Marxian “mode of production,” might also include one to Foucault’s historical
épistemes) then inevitably brings with it the problem of the break, not particularly solved by the
notion of a “transition.” In Schmitt, however, the fact of the break is an energizing one: first,
because it suggests that each break, the historical disintegration of a given nomos, will call for
a historically original production of a new legal superstructure or Novum. This call then lays in
place the notion of an active moment of constitutive power…14

Schmitt wrote The Nomos of the Earth following World War II, during which he
served in Nazi Germany, and the “break” that concerned him was the end of a European order and the rise of an American era that he views with deep suspicion. He was
pessimistic that the US was capable of such responsibility—and even if it was, that
its reign would be desirable given “the nature” of “North Atlanticist” conceptions of
space. As the US and the other Americas became a more central geopolitical actor,
both the global omniscience of British-Greenwich naval ubiquity and the Roman-Germanic legal order of grounded jurisdiction were displaced by other forms of transactional sovereignty. In Schmitt’s history, this shift also validated transnational claims

26

The Nomos of the Cloud

of sovereignty over entire continental zones, such as the Monroe Doctrine, which
Schmitt greatly admired as a model of how a multipolar nomos should work. The catastrophes of World War I and II led to the establishment of a binary architecture held
in place by the extranational domains of the US and Soviet blocs, their hierarchies
of client states, their proxy battles over postcolonial nations, their transformation of
Berlin into an enclave inside an enclave, and so forth. Today another multipolarity
between China, the other BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India, China) economies, the North
American Free Trade Agreement, ASEAN, the European Union, and the Eurasian Economic Union, among others, plays out both in and over types of space that are equally
geographic and technological.
Schmitt’s history of the origins of that European nomos is staged through the continental encounter with the supposedly unpartitioned New World, and the “free soil”
it presented to the European jurisdictional imagination. (We know full well that the
very idea of an “empty American continent” is itself an invitation to genocide. For our
purposes, we rehearse Schmitt’s theoretical argument but not the validity of its worldview.) Schmitt claims that recognition of an “unwritten” territorial outside confronting a European interior motivated competing common laws and juridical traditions to
respond by formalizing political geography. The pressing challenge of giving order to
the “free soil” made the current heterodox and ambiguous state of jurisdictional affairs
in Europe somehow intolerable by comparison. That solution ratified the subdivision
of loops of land, but not sea (and largely ignoring air and the z-axis altogether), in favor
of a master Archimedean point from which this political cartography would be consolidated and naturalized, as symbolized by the Westphalian compromise half a century
after Columbus’s first expedition. Today the continuing (if still incipient) emergence of
planetary-scale computation may represent a similar break and a similar challenge to
the political geographic order. It does so not only because the Cloud is a new continent
to be colonized, but because, as a kind of space, it trespasses the Schmittian metaphysical distinction between solid ground and liquid sea as the essential poles of geopolitical
space and theory.
This puts us today neither at the end of the liberal world-state nor as subjects of a
consolidated and self-transparent empire, but, rather inside something much harder to
map because it is not entirely certain which space is which, what referent is physical
and what distinction is abstract, the fiber-optic line or the pulse of light? This is not
only a crisis of legitimacy; it is also a crisis of addressability, and one that initiates a
break between one order and another, nomic or not. Our own encounter with a new
world of unaddressed space generates a productive confusion over what type of Earth
is to be claimed: land, sea, air, and now information; each of these seems to always
be allocated, addressed, owned, and unowned differently. But this also is where we
begin to depart from Schmitt’s framework altogether. He historicized the fate of Westphalia and the European nomos through his two metaphysical modes of geospatial

The Nomos of the Cloud

27

governance: the opposition of an authentic grounded order and organic habitation
versus an inauthentic maritime and aerial lawlessness extending over the line. The
latter’s promiscuous forms are governed not by immediate occupation over time but
by abstractions, located by flags, mathematical geologistics, and a vectorial relation to
starry neighbors.15 The industrial militarization of aerial space with World War I destabilized this essential opposition, and with it, according to Schmitt, the basic foundation for not only European geopolitical architecture and threatened the possibility of a
renewed nomic order to come. From the sky, a pilot’s survey and visual capture of land
smoothed the ground over and made it perceptually flat, oceanic, optical, geometric,
quantitative. The drifting swirl of aerial warfare overcomes the distinction between
grounded habitation and liquid movement through abstract space. Later, Virilio would
echo (in terms not so unlike Schmitt’s) the significance of this shift and extend the
analysis to include the arrival of information spaces that govern and are governed
through an even more radical visual abstraction of planetary space and time, and the
even more unnatural mathematization of territory manipulated from afar.16 Jameson
again: “Yet the prophecy of an air-power return to total war, with the friend-foe pairing
replaced by self and other, human and subhuman, is only partially correct, for it is no
longer a question of air as an element, but one of cyberspace. Information is the new
element that re-problematizes the spatial.”17
The Stack also contributes to a geopolitical order and is a manifest representation
of that order, but what sort? The Stack does not neatly fit into Schmitt’s historical
model or vice versa. Its appropriations of irregular territories and complications of geographical distinctions suggest more than modern political geometry outfitted with fast
processors. Planetary-scale computation may need to be understood as a successor to
these other modes of geographic governance—land, sea, air—each with its own logics
of partition. But unlike the US Department of Defense, which also recognizes “cyber”
as the fourth spatial domain of war but describes it as necessarily subordinate to existing forms of state jurisdiction, I suggest that other shifts are at work, perhaps even a
break, that will prove more difficult to accommodate and contain. It is neither that
the spaces of The Stack are enrolled into established systems or simply stamped with
a new governing system of addresses all at once; rather, an accumulation of interactions between layers in an emergent structure is producing the scale, dimension,
and contours of this supercomputational geography in the first place.18 First and foremost, The Stack is occupying itself. Schmitt’s opposition of the “land versus liquid”
logics of sovereignty (“Eternal Rome” versus “Eternal Carthage”) does not hold, any
more than the distinction between the physical and the virtual.19 For planetary-scale
computation, the practical issues of addressing the world cross-divides of solid and
fluid, the material and the informational, between sand and bits, between things
and actions, between objects and enunciations, archived pasts and simulated futures
and the structures that would govern all those exchanges as they bloom into new

28

The Nomos of the Cloud

forms. If addressability is also some form of accountability, all this congeals toward
what kind of geopolitical space?
6. Land/Sea/Air/Cloud
To approximate an answer, it will first be necessary to show how this collapse of the
Schmittian distinction between land and sea (and all that it implies for the ultimate
career of states as they move into the Cloud and The Stack) is accomplished not only
by a radicalization of the “aerial” into even more vaporous “information space,” but
equally as much through a radicalization of the physical line carving into territory
and guaranteeing its own enforcement. As The Stack emerges as both the machine and
the geography, the territory and the map at once, yet more smoke escapes from the
ears of Schmitt’s direct and indirect heirs. Schmitt’s spatial thought is aligned with the
German philosophy of his historical moment. He writes approvingly of Heidegger’s
dictum, “Die Welt ist nicht im Raum, sondem der Raum ist in der Welt” (The world is not
in space; rather, space is in the world) as a path out of the “nihilism of empty space.”20
Jameson conveys that “the origins of (nomos of the Earth’s) ‘spatial thought’ ... [follows] Husserl, whose critique of modern abstraction ... locates the fall in the separation, the occultation and/or repression, of geometry from the existential praxis of land
surveying in ancient Egypt. Schmitt diagnoses a similar degradation in the dissociation
of the juridical tradition from the brute geographical fact of Landnahme, that is to
say, the seizure and occupation of land as such.” The geographies of land, from sea,
from air, are arranged by Schmitt not just as different projects and techniques, but as
a tragic dilution of a prelapsarian origination of ground toward increasingly legalistic,
geometric, and virtual abstractions. In considering a nomos of the Cloud by counting
the transoceanic fiber-optics also digging through the countryside, data centers buried
deep in mountains near dams, the exotic minerals pulled from African rivers to make
cell phones, alongside the engineered hallucinations of augmented reality, an inability
to stay true to the dirt-venerating provincialism of Schmittian nomic priorities is seriously challenged. No workable distinction between ground and water, between Cloud
infrastructure and Cloud interactivity as mapped across some spectrum from tangible to
virtual, can survive much poking and prodding. Even so, there are nomic claims on the
undetermined territory of the Cloud, as recent revelations regarding state surveillance
programs and state versus state cyberwarfare make plain, for example. Even so, the
residual confusion of jurisdictional divisions of land, sea, air, and cyber is itself worth
mapping forensically. From its buzz and howl, perhaps alternative governmentalities
for the decades that lie beyond might cohere.
The Schmittian primal scenes are the plowing of a field, taken and defended, and
the state’s duty to build good walls around it. These sovereignties over place are materially substantiated by a defended occupation of place that is supposed to outlast the

The Nomos of the Cloud

29

prosthetic logistical visions of Roman surveyors who have come and gone. Two lines:
the ox draws its line into the absolute place of this soil, whereas the itinerant emissary
of empire superimposes his invisible geometry—one a true fact and the other a temporary mathematical conjecture. For Schmitt (and for Heidegger and any number of
subsequent political programs, both left and right, irredentist and esoteric), “the very
possibility of legal relations is dependent upon an original act of collective appropriation of land which establishes the material matrix—literally the ground—of those legal
relations.”21 Even forgetting that this is the same ox plow that Jacques Derrida used,
once upon a time, to prosecute for writing against ontologies of presence, it should be
obvious that “facts on the ground” absolutely do not defend sites against revision and
innovation.22 It should be said that for Schmitt, if not for Heidegger, it is the physical taking and defense of land that matters most, not the transgenerational claims of
autochthonous bloodlines that may have lost out against new forces. These political
conundrums are still on our plates, and the ecological absolutes staring back at us are
based not in the simple honor of defending homelands, but in the physicalization of
abstraction and the abstraction of physicalization. The Cloud is not virtual; it is physical
even if it is not always “on the ground,” even when it is deep underground. There is
nothing immaterial about massless information that demands such energy from the
Earth.
Networks make space and take space, and like any other architecture, by their inscriptions into a given location, they exclude other possibilities from being there. Networks
dwell differently than buildings do, however, and they exceed what a bipedal hominid
would recognize as a single location, but they are nevertheless placeful. Network edges
and lines produce interiors and exteriors, and so networks are not just superimposed on
a given territory, they also produce a real territory by striating it. Consider the Montana
East Line Telephone Association of the 1920s.23 Before the federal universalization of
telephone line service across the vast rural areas of the United States, farm collectives
made use of a network of land demarcation and domain interiorization already in
place: the miles of barbed wire that segmented the prairie. Using barbed wire fences,
they fashioned crude but effective telephony using the steel lines as a signal relay channel. This network did what networks always do. The same network that links and integrates locations, house to house, in a disembodied conversation, is the same network
that demarcates the distance and separation of each area by bordering them into a
series of continuous positions. The same network of wire that virtualizes the presence
of voice also establishes the territorial coherency of homesteads, each job easily folding into and on the other without fuss (farms, you see, are not allergic to disembodied
inscriptions of informational geography). One line links across inhuman distance, and
one line separates place into space, but no real line ever does one without the other and
each allows the other to work. But any line cannot by itself constitute its own political
efficacy and make its own decision about what is inside and what is outside. Schmitt

30

The Nomos of the Cloud

is not wrong when he argues that “the political works not by founding or composing,
but by settling and dividing.”24 But when the ground itself is indeterminate, when the
air and the Cloud are both so heavy with mass, then the composition of settlement and
the division of founding crossover into one another, and so the sovereign decision over
that inversion is always in play.
For Schmitt these kinds of piracies and perversities are always threatening to undermine the regulatory work of authentically grounded power as they reverberate in the
void of our geopolitics. Onshore or off, the phrase “beyond the line” includes an exceptional or unregularized geography carried by maritime movements as well. Schmitt
argued that “when the great pioneering powers of Europe struck out towards the world
oceans, this immeasurable broadening of the known world resulted in a qualitatively
new conception of physical space. The opening of the world oceans created the cultural
context in which the universe could be conceived of as an infinite, empty space.”25 The
internalization of this empty depth was seen in new modes of political thought, painterly perspective, literature, and philosophy. “Released from the limits and inhibitions
of traditional spatial intuition, the ruling classes of Europe were mentally equipped
to become the masters of the world.” The emptying out of intuitive anthropometric
space was the starting point for the arrival of a universal spatial order based on mathematical formalization and geographic interchangeability. Decade after decade, this
groundless materialism was radicalized over again by mechanical production, industrial flight, modern chemistry, and, eventually, we now understand, digital computing.
As said, from the sky looking down, the sea and the land are both flat planes full of
points located in a universally matching coordinate system, virtualizing the immediate perception of geography in motion. “Air space,” writes Cornelia Vissman, “seems
to engender constructed images of space rather than space-experience.”26 This protocinematic flattening of natural dimensions, where the Earth itself is seen merely as a
“thicker version of the sky,” disheartened Schmitt, who saw it as a catastrophic ephemeralization of the embodied occupation of the Earth that should underwrite durable
human geopolitics. Instead, that architecture would now be built on the unreliable
footing of overwhelming synthetic speed and the screen of false equivalences.27 This
is because “movement makes space, rather than happens in, space”28 and because this
abstract global sphere is not properly occupied, it offers space that is merely measured.
For Schmitt, it is less physically defended than divided up like an algebraic equation,29
and it is the spacelessness of the twentieth century that the contemporary geopolitics
provides, with none of the rooted limits of solid fortresses and true walls and no true
distinction between friend and enemy. Without these, Schmitt warned of an era inaugurated not only by global war but of total war of all against all.30
According to this line of thought, the deconcretizing of space instates a geopolitical
simulacrum spinning in an endlessly self-available matrix. It can never finally govern because it can never find a solid ground on which to erect institutions capable of

The Nomos of the Cloud

31

durable distinction between inside and out, us and them. At the same time, however,
this universalism, “homogeneous … and morally and legally malleable,” also has for
Schmitt a certain ethnic and economic odor. It is highly functional for certain forms of
capture and exploitation, namely English and American forms, which would not defeat
their military enemies but instead “disqualify” them by policing moral and technical
incapabilities with “universal” architectures that are in fact extensions of their own
specific interests. This counterhegemonic move undergirds how some on the contemporary left, have made use of Schmittian concepts, against what they take to be a
US-centric neo-Wilsonian empire building, and instead in the service of a multipolar
geopolitical architecture that is heterogeneous and programmatically antiuniversalist.31 For Schmitt, but not for most of these leftist deployments, that multipolarity is
also couched in transnational Großraum (for ASCII, Grossraum), or “great spaces” or
spheres of influences and domains of dominion over which dominant political cultures
reserve systemic sovereignty, such as the US Monroe Doctrine claims over North and
South American continental space. However, to establish what the nomos of the Cloud
may or may not be, it is necessary to counter the misrecognition of the extraordinary
spacefulness of global information networks, tracking their ongoing occupation, settlement, and doctrinal composition. We will observe the technically necessary and politically limited universality through which platforms can cohere polities, and toward
that, we will look more closely at the grossraum, the type of claims it makes and could
make (and how hard it is to decide its inside from its outside).
7. The Nomos of the Cloud?
For Schmitt, the Monroe Doctrine symbolized an end of older Jus Publicum European
system of international relations and operated in a parallel domain to that arrangement of Westphalian modules, one for which multiple political geographic ordering
principles abut and overlap. In that, the League of Nations was explicitly “excluded
from asserting jurisdictional claims in the American Grossraum, i.e. the Western Hemisphere. ... The Western Hemisphere was excluded from the purview of the League,”
and so represented not only another pole of power competing with Europe but
another political geographic mechanism altogether. At first the model it represented
appealed strongly to Schmitt, and his “advocation of a Großraum world-view ... grew
out of his admiration for the origins of the Monroe Doctrine, when it was a territorially delimited, hemispherical order. From economic origins, it had found continental
coherence, but had then been distorted into a liberal, universal, spaceless policy of
non-intervention.”32 The model it suggested of a hemispheric multipolar arrangement
of geographically natural transnational domains gave way, however, to what was for
him most dubious thing about twentieth-century globalization. In Schmitt’s positive
vision for it, through the Monroe Doctrine, the United States is the sole sovereign in

32

The Nomos of the Cloud

the Western Hemisphere and its will is fiat. The doctrine reintroduced transnational
territorial lines of demarcation into the body of modern international law, infusing it
not just according to population and land, or space and politics, but by “land, people
and idea,” in opposition to liberal internationalism and “Anglo-Saxon pseudo-universalism.”33 For the older Schmitt, both Wilsonian/United Nations globalism as well as
Nazi Germany’s Lebensraum diluted a really “genuine” Grossraum solution, partially
because both rejected true multipolarity and the coexistence of Grossräume (plural) in
a stable order.
For The Stack, we recognize how our contemporary territorial and epidermal lines
are multiplied, dashed, and cross-hatched as they overlap jurisdictions, and in relation
to them there is no cardinal outside or outdoors per se. Their framings seem at once
cacophonous and practical to the management of everyday life. To Schmitt, the “free
soil” of an undernamed and undermeasured land is not the same as the sterility of
abstracted global space for which he claimed to feel such horror vacui. It is not something that hollows out the discipline of sovereign decision, but rather something that
demands it to act. So where Schmitt’s original notion of sovereign exception spoke to
the suspension of an internal law and its spatial imprints, it now moves to the adjudication of external geography, of the free soil of planetary-scale computation that for all
its mathematics is not sterile, and of the lines that mark its starting points. In this, the
sovereign decision shifts focus from the judgment of the enemy toward the design of
active walls and partitions, and as it does, the figure–ground relationship between the
law and the line, each framing the other, starts to wobble and oscillate. The design of
what executes the interiorization or the exteriorization of any boundary, exemplified
by the reversibility of the fence that defines the exceptional space of the camp/bunker, is
not only controversial but essential. In an even partially multipolar world, the effects of
these accumulating reversals are that much more complex, but not without their own
governable rhythms. The ground begins to fall out from beneath Schmitt’s bottom-line
prioritization of geographic lines of durable jurisdictional settlement over promiscuous
geometric grids and our ability to tell which is which. When the sovereign was revealed
by and through his decision over the state of emergency, its identity was fixed into
relief by this action, but now we are without clarity as to where sovereign arises from
which decision. Is it from the decision over interiority/exteriority, or is it their irresolvable reversibility, or is it the line itself deciding the polis rather than other way around,
or is it the programming of the line to flip-flop the open and closed according to some
generative script? If we also sense that mechanisms of exception are becoming somehow increasingly normalized (and even infrastructural) by their further modernization,
then it is because they are now embedded in the actual lines, envelopes, and interfaces
that mediate the reversibility of the camp/enclave machine itself. Platform sovereignty
may not only accommodate but require this embedding of decision-making interfaces.
As technologies more than discourses, theirs is a captured decision over a now less

The Nomos of the Cloud

33

ambiguous interior and exterior limitation of where the outside starts and on which
side of the line it sits, drawing us in or drawing us out (but even once decided, by automation or not, the active abstraction of physical geography takes over as lines reverse
polarity all over again). It is here, in the automation of the exception, that infrastructural and platform sovereignties begin. As the provisional decision over the exception
is designed into the technology of the line, the automated envelope and the Interface
influences not only how the platform will address its Users, but also how Users will
program the platform, and so another foundation of the Stack’s political geography is
established: the machine.
The Stack makes space by occupying it; it does so by surveying abstraction, absorbing it, and virtualizing it, which is how it is even possible to consider whether or not
it expresses a nomos at all. If the space of planetary-scale computation is a new kind
of “free soil,” then that “soil” is land, sea, and air all at once, equally tangible and
ephemeral. It can be both inside the line of the Westphalian state and its internal legal
optics but outside its borders and sovereignty; sometimes it is both outside its borders
and internalized by legal and military sight. It digs deep into the ground, tunneling
cables across cities and countryside; passes across the seafloor of oceans linking continents physically as well as virtually; and bounces down from swarms of overhead
satellites and cell towers. Its infrastructural profile contains all of these qualities of the
earth at once, each of them dependent on the others. It smooths space by striating
it with heavy physical grids of cables and server farms, and striates space by smoothing it out with ubiquitous access, sensing, relay, and processing micropoints. For its
chthonic Cloud, data centers are housed under mountains with reliable ice cores; suburban farmland between metropolitan trading centers is redug to lay private cable for
algorithmic trading concerns near the old AT&T switches in New Jersey, realizing a new
topographic expression of the transport layer of the TCP/IP stack; while the wireless
frequency spectrum is subdivided, auctioned, allocated, and bundled into derivatives
like any other prized commercial real estate. Whereas the Schmittian “grounded” way
of thinking detests dedifferentiated space and the flattening superimposition of multiple maps, valorizing instead the perspectival spatial order of human establishment,
the geographies of The Stack go a long way toward collapsing distinctions between the
one and the other, as its interlacing of land, sea, and air through networks of recombinant flows realizes the simultaneous physicalization of the virtual and the virtualization of physical forces. Again, ground is abstracted as abstractions are grounded, but
if the platform space in question cannot be collapsed into a single type of Earth (land,
sea, air, or cyber), this doesn’t make it any less contested. Practical sovereignty over
what its geography becomes is animated and augmented by a drive for a spectrumdominant position within an integrated totality of enumerable, governable zones, both
high and low, visible and invisible. Building out the spaces of The Stack is precisely the
accomplishment of Google, the NSA, the Chinese Ministry of Public Security, Alibaba

34

The Nomos of the Cloud

Group, and many other global cloud platforms, less by some Lockean right of ownership underwritten by cultivation than by the strategic articulation of the contours of
a plastic territory. Its spaces are bent, inflated, and folded, and mapped accordingly.
Inherited political orders are both circumvented and reinforced as the worlds they once
described are disenchanted. That is, whereas states may be agents doing the taking and
formulating of worlds, they cannot do so without transforming the anatomy of their
own sovereignty at the same moment. The Stack space is not an already given vessel into which states intervene or markets mediate or political theologies invest with
myths; rather it is generated in the confluence of platform logics that will recalculate
the fate of all of these. On their own, the flexible terms of occupation might warrant
Schmitt’s warning against the permission that technical universality gives to total war
(or what Virilio later called “pure war”). Unrestricted by the brakes of proper nomos, the
absolute motivation for capture extends up and down from molecular to atmospheric
scales. But for The Stack, these terms are not operating on their own untethered; they
are instead as bound by their planetary situation as any other form of occupation. Even
in the absence of a proper nomos, they congeal layer by layer into a metastructural
order of a different governing order: a machine that is a state held together by deciding
the spaces of technical exceptions as much as legal ones.
8. A Google Grossraum?
The machine that is a state is not engineered without conflict and controversy. Today
the specter of Google Grossraum hangs over (and under and in between) The Stack.
Google’s armatures, its internal and external interfaces, operate all up and down the
spectra opened up by universalist computational geographies. Especially since Google
is, to date, so deeply associated with the US and its interests, to what extent has the
global space of planetary computation been occupied by its particular ambitions and
strategies, and already established a certain claim on an embryonic political geography?
Does “Google” (literally the cloud platform and the geography defined by it) represent
something like a Monroe Doctrine of the Cloud, filling out and supervising a domain
extended well beyond the North American continental shelf, across a more comprehensive composite spectrum? For Schmitt, the first Monroe Doctrine represented a
break with an older order, and perhaps the new one (if it so exists) does too, but just as
the first lost its validity for him by its transformation from an upright territorial claim
into deterritorializing universalization, then at least, to this extent, it is possible to
consider a it new doctrine because the first was itself already also so nebular?34 The UScentricity of planetary computational space is even built into the infrastructure’s own
autocartography. Not only was ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers), the Internet addressing authority, established in California and its relationship with the US federal authorities long controversial, but today the United States is

The Nomos of the Cloud

35

still (and may remain) the unnamed, unmarked center of addressable Internet space
(US websites are usually “.com” not “.co.us” as they would be without this infrastructural exceptionalism). It is in this context that the National Security Agency’s (NSA)
comprehensive data capture, surveillance, storage, and metadata analysis programs
as disclosed by Edward Snowden and colleagues are understood to represent a strong
American state maneuver of sovereign control over (or, at the very least, of policing
of) the spectral spaces of planetary-scale computation. The willing and unwilling complicity of major commercial Cloud platforms in this endeavor associates them directly
with the reach of that claim, and so the Monroe Doctrine of the Cloud and the Google
Grossraum are seen by some to conceal only one another. This conflation may simplify
things for those who prefer easy plots, but it actually does not explain the situation
very well. This decisive appropriation of “free soil” by US security services was met,
of course, with outrage, including calls for alternative non-US Internets that could
circumvent this capture (and in some cases also to ensure local and often authoritarian control by political, economic, and religious authorities).35 We also know that the
NSA’s acquisitive line-drawing is not unique and that Russian and Chinese agencies are
at least as acquisitive, if not much more, and it is also unlikely that European agencies do not manage similar if less hegemonic operations as well. Still, the unipolarity
of this still unmarked universality already overflows the normal legal geography, and
its militarized brokerage does more than just draw a new territory. It also occupies it.
Provisional omniscience comes from making policing the primary technique of spatial
approximation, such that the geographic delineations are the result of the search for
criminality and transgression, and so the friend-enemy distinction between mutually
suspicious states is augmented by a User-hacker distinction between the rights and
abuses of platform sovereignty.
As is to be expected, global opinion dramatizes this in contradictory ways. With
significant exceptions, the web has largely been developed through technologies and
protocols of British, European, and American origin, with many of the most powerful governmental and economic players still located there (though it is certain that
Chinese and Indian counterparts are at least as important in engineering The Stack that
most people will ultimately inhabit). Its global growth could be read then as the creeping spread of cyber-empire and part of a larger superpower monocultural campaign,
starting in Silicon Valley and Washington, DC, and spreading to world capitals like
an invasive machinic species. Some European activists, on both the left and the right,
describe it this way. Alternatively, the contested terrain in question, both above and
below ground and across the plateaus of scale, could be seen as one that was always
there but only recently activated and given shape by available technology, like the
electromagnetic spectrum was before industrialization. Or instead, as seen through the
slits of a Guy Fawkes mask, it should be defined as a global commons, a messy and truant public sphere for the common intellect, private speech, and social expression that

36

The Nomos of the Cloud

retains, and continuously regenerates, its own sovereign autonomies, and over which
no security apparatus should ever claim to guarantee final jurisdiction. Or rather, for
the view from Beijing (and from some of Washington, DC), sovereignty remains by
right of modern national borders to retain (somehow) full control of the data that sit
inside their Westphalian loop by engineering increasingly deep packet filtering at key
transnational chokepoints.36 Propositions for alternative Internets that would secede
from the totality in order to retain relative political, cultural, or economic autonomy
could be based on a more autonomous physical layer, regional encryption systems,
or even unique addressing protocols. All of these are theoretically possible, and for
some military and financial sectors, they already exist and thrive. But other proposals
come from Brazil, Russia, Turkey, Iran, Saudi Arabia, the Schengen Area, and others that
would require new platforms to process local data only on servers that physically reside
inside the territorial borders of each state. Their data would be therefore (it is thought)
subject to provincial policing and supposedly unavailable to other state actors (the NSA
or Google, perhaps). In some cases, this may be technically possible in limited ways,
but as a general politico-geographic principle on which to scale the nomos of the Cloud,
it is a reactionary counter-policing that is of dubious value in the long run. Data do not
really have a national career unless they are forced to produce one. Yes, information is
just as bound to local and specific contexts as it is to global ones, but the idea that its
transactional flows could be filtered into national flavors and pinned down in accordance with the coherent order of a fixed imagined community and its ethnic, legal, or
linguistic forms invites the sort of nationalism that always ends in tears. That so many
feel the design choice is between this secret police, that secret police, and cryptoanarchism shows just how dangerously immature our geopolitical theory of planetary-scale
computation is at this point.
So where should the decision over the exceptionality, or lack thereof, of the spaces
of planetary computation reside? For now, we observe the metalegal acquisition and
cultivation of Cloud territory by state and nonstate platforms but understand that the
depth of that territory guarantees its ongoing malleability and resistance to full capture.
It’s true that while the contours of such spaces are composed precisely by their occupation (entered into and so made), the armature of planetary-scale computation has a
determining logic that is self-reinforcing if not self-fulfilling, and which through the
automation of its own infrastructural operations, exceeds any national designs even if
it is also used on their behalf. The programming of inversions between its interior and
exteriors is generic to the program of the structure itself. Decision is based less on an
economy of scarce sovereignty than on replicable algorithms built into the partitions
of vertical and horizontal landscapes. Sovereignty is not just made about infrastructural
lines; it is made by infrastructural lines. This principle of platform sovereignty is where
the costume changes of User into citizen and citizen into User are worked out. In that
those lines are already globally crisscrossing grids, layered one on top of the other, the

The Nomos of the Cloud

37

portrait of unipolar universality versus multipolar heterogeneity is far messier without
any zero-sum tally to represent it. The Stack is not the grid but an accumulation of
grids, some communicable to one another and others not, some affording one type of
provisional sovereignty and others another type, some incarcerating Users and others
offering lines of flight, and many of them reversible. The tangles thicken.
Perhaps the regional amorphousness of a “Monroe Doctrine of the Cloud” is both
the wrong nomic precedent to claim and the wrong profile of empire to be resisted.
The Stack appears to be American, and as of now, it both is and is not (it is also mostly
Chinese), but in the long term, this identity may actually prove far less significant than
it might seem today. The Stack will also change what “American” means in the first
place, as the identity of a geopolitical actor and as a governmental service platform,
and in doing so, The Stack as a whole may resemble that new national definition less
and less. If the idea of one universal grid is a ruse in the service of a particular type
of unipolar economy, then exponential overlaying of incommensurate grids brings
different kinds of reversals and accidents. As computational edges and nodes claim
some autonomy by their programmed automation, they also possess more authority
as decision-making shifts from the designer to the designed. The platform sovereignties that emerge in turn generate their own unplanned productive accidents, layer by
layer and in combination, and with them come other universal positions into which
Users might dip in and out. These are not exactly cosmopolitan for reasons discussed
below, but they are nevertheless not unipolar and are quite capable of bending state
claims against their will. As discussed in more detail in the next chapter, another core
paradox of platform sovereignty (besides its geographic illegibility and axial reversibility) is between architectures of standardization that bring together heterogeneous
projects and decentralizing effects, on the one hand, and transitory dynamic interfaces,
which in the accumulation of trillions of interactions enforce the authority of that
standardization, on the other. With the break from one nomos toward something else,
also nomic or not, comes a change in the topology of governance, from loops on a plane
to something else. Platform sovereignty is derived from the Interfacial line, surface and
partition, and how its designation influences how it will Address its Users and how they
Address the platform and one another through it. In this regard, the amalgamation and
reorganization of interactions into verticalized planes and towers is not only an event
in the world but a process of making the world. Its geography is not only the allocation
of lines; but is a squaring of the line into frames and a multiplication of frames and
cells into grids. As grids become volumetric, the potential interiorizing reversals of their
component lines multiply exponentially, and the squaring of lines over and again leads
to more grids. Grids are reversible by design and the “sovereignty” of their reversibility
is neither extrinsic nor exceptional; it is generic to their operation. It’s what grids do
automatically. Or to paraphrase Gordon Matta-Clark, a volumetric grid describes all
the possible layers without implying any priority or preferences. This is infuriating to

38

The Nomos of the Cloud

the Schmittian requirement for grounded, human-scale order of clear-cut antagonistic
oppositions arranged in adjacent set-pieces, but oh well. Grids are bent and piled up on
top of each other; multilayered images of their compound margins further convolute
the situation as individual grids that were designed for one specific effect are braided
into a composite infrastructure with emergent plans all their own. Some of these are
expressed by standardized protocols and application interfaces, interoperable standards, and service wrappers.37 With the standardization of these, the rigidity of the grid
and its isolating cells lays down the generic system that gives an addressable location
to every site of interest held within its honeycomb chambers. However, its geometric
lines, up and down and over and across, are also avenues of regular escape and open
possibilities of relation between those addressees. This is its bargain: no more innocent
outside, now only a theoretically recombinant inside.
Mobility along the grid is also the writing of another line, and as these accumulate,
they wear grooves into the landscape forming new channels. This is not best described
however, as lighting a path of autopoietic “freedom,” if only because the lines of the
grid and lines of mobilization through the grid are always reversible. Movement away
is another mode of capture. Mobility is only one part of an economy of motility, from
capture to camouflage, that holds no happy absolutes; as forms, these grids are the
diagram of forces frozen, just as its forces are the form of the diagram made.38 Immobilization is not what counteracts the drawing of the line of acceleration; it is what demonstrates its reversibility as a matter of normal course. For this, the decision over the
regularity and regulation of slowing down or speeding up, over passage from or into
the cells of the grids, can be programmed into the actual partitions of the world, and in
the end it is their programmability, not their ideal geometry or geography, that affords
platform sovereignty to their User. The geometries at work don’t simply reflect governance; they perform it: from line into frame into topos into something else situated
where we might once have put nomos. Whether deliberately or accidentally designed,
a geopolitical architecture is cast. Information is transformed into shape, drawing an
arc of algorithmic governance along braided topoi built of asymmetrical superimpositions; less modus vivendi than the mutual invisibility of overlapping sovereignties. All
of that.
Even as the sovereignty of designation over the “exceptions” of interiority and
motility are unevenly embedded into the programs (e.g., architectural programs, algorithmic programs, software programs, political programs, economic programs) of the
partition, the design of its automation remains part of the ongoing assignment for the
design of The Stack as a whole. Topology is still the design problem, and as ever, the
drawing of the line is both inscriptive and descriptive, both immanent and projective,
both a writing of an immediate site and a determination of whatever might be there
instead. The drawing can mark a surface, frame a site or event, or prototype how lines,
frames, and grids should be engaged in the future or elsewhere. This is how worlds

The Nomos of the Cloud

39

remake themselves even as they intersect and unravel. As contemporary philosophy
bemoans the preeminence of “digital” technologies and how they ensure an erasure
of worlds and a profanation of solidarity, some posit world-making (mondialization)
as the antithesis of globalization with its “atonal” quantification and banalization of
affective experience.39 For some writers (as for Schmitt), the loss of a special coherence
of articulation is also loss of all inceptive self-renewal.40 For them, computation has
smothered the possibility of radical breaks with the present condition, leaving us all
to wander about in a virtual haze, having confused the entropy of ubiquity with the
space of creation. However, I am not convinced that the end is upon us or that perplexed melancholy is wisdom.41 I remain deeply curious as to how sensible oceans of
planetary computation will evolve, making available a colossus deluge of connections
within and across people, things, and traces, not necessarily according to the doctrines of the Google Großraum, but in the collateral accidents of wonderfully inhuman
machines (including us) running about, in and out. I suppose that for both of these
positions, universal computation does destroy the “world,” and while for the former
this is a dishonorable apocalypse, for the latter, it is a good starting point. But stepping
back from this too-stark opposition, we do continue to understand framing (by lines,
by grids) as the presentation of some part of the world to itself (or to another part of
another world). That frame is a device for saying something new or to say something
about what is and is not new. The design of that frame itself and its capacity to enforce
its own presentation is how the sense of a full world is approximated.
Clearly any discussion of the suspension or superseding of political norms that have
grown up around the horizontal subdivisions of space, from national laws to human
rights to currencies, will raise more questions that it can answer. We don’t know as
much about what kinds of geopolitical effects vertical lines bring. We don’t know how
to conceive of force and justice through them, and we barely know how to image the
Earth through them. How is verticality similar and different in practice than horizontal? Does it mean first and foremost just so many horizontal lines overlapping and
thickening such that they now have height, or are they a qualitatively different order?
Regarding The Stack, I argue that they do represent a different order, but that this order
is not given in advance. We need to design what that order is and will be. We start from
what we know about what layering does to horizontal lines and what layers of vertical
lines and sheets of horizontal lines pierced by slopes of diagonal and oblique lines do to
political geography. Drawing from the sections already presented, we can make a summary. First, they perforate horizontal lines, making their ability to contain and conceal,
as camp or bunker, more uncertain. As we’ve seen of late, this provokes states to mercilessly refortify their topographic contours. They normalize the exception of reversibility, making the movement between inside and outside into a programmed function
of infrastructural surfaces and interfaces. They multiply the quantity of lines, making
dense and unresolved grids. Some grids are filled with uniform and monochromatic

40

The Nomos of the Cloud

cells and others with hierarchical patterns, but all afford some kind of social posture
and position. Their proliferation doesn’t only close off space into smaller units; it also
produces new territories that are equally physical and abstract, heavy and virtual. In
turn, this space is motivating a new land grab among state and nonstate actors alike;
it is also forcing transformations in how geography is held, conceptualized, modeled,
and defended. The order of those transformations occupies a similar location in our
architectures of sovereignty as nomos, but because it involves grids of land, air, and sea
all at once, dedifferentiating their relative weight and liquidities, the logics of this new
arrangement are also perhaps very different.42 Because these transformations are both
driven by planetary-scale computation and mediated through it, any strong distinctions between a political geography supported by technical systems and technological
systems spread through agonistic geographic space are undermined.
The state takes on the armature of a machine, because the machine, The Stack, has
already taken on the roles and register of the state. While the proliferation of lines has
normalized a certain kind of reversibility, the early geopolitics of The Stack also sees the
fortification of intentional camps and bunkers, with some populations excluded from
movement and transaction and others stationed in networks of enclaves absorbing
capital by centripetal force. To design up and away from this outcome does not mean
a reestablishment of ground for an upright primate perspective of natural place or prematurely freezing in place The Stack’s most preliminary new geographies as the only
options. An emergent alternative to archaic and recidivist geopolitics must be based
on something more scalable than settler colonialism, legacy genomes, and Bronze Age
myths and the maps of nations that have resulted from these.43 The discussion of the
layers of The Stack, and the productive accidents of each, is an outline platform sovereignty, a term that will appear explicitly in some parts of the following chapters but
lurks underneath almost every paragraph in some way. But first, what exactly is a platform, and how do the layers of The Stack constitute one?

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

The goal of future wars is already established: control over the network and the flows of information running through its architecture. It seems to me that the quest for global totalitarian power
is not behind us but is a true promise of the future. If the network architecture culminates in one
global building then there must be one power that controls it. The central political question of
our time is the nature of this future power.
—Boris Groys1
The essence of datagram is connectionless. That means you have no relationship established
between sender and receiver. Things just go separately, one by one, like photons.
—Louis Pouzin2

9. Platforms
Platforms are what platforms do. They pull things together into temporary higherorder aggregations and, in principle, add value both to what is brought into the platform and to the platform itself. They can be a physical technical apparatus or an
alphanumeric system; they can be software or hardware, or various combinations.
As of now, there are some organizational and technical theories of platforms available, but considering the ubiquity of platforms and their power in our lives, they
are not nearly robust enough. Perhaps one reason for the lack of sufficient theories
about them is that platforms are simultaneously organizational forms that are highly
technical, and technical forms that provide extraordinary organizational complexity
to emerge, and so as hybrids they are not well suited to conventional research programs. As organizations, they can also take on a powerful institutional role, solidifying economies and cultures in their image over time. For The Stack, this is their
most important characteristic but perhaps also the hardest to fully appreciate. Platforms possess an institutional logic that is not reducible to those of states or markets
or machines, as we normally think of them. They are a different but possibly equally
powerful and important form. Many different kinds of systems can be understood as

42

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

platforms, from urban street grids to Google, and so to consider their common operations, some abstraction is necessary. Part of their alterity to normal public and private
operations is the apparently paradoxical way that they standardize and consolidate the
terms of transaction through decentralized and undetermined interactions. Platforms
can be based on the global distribution of Interfaces and Users, and in this, platforms
resemble markets. At the same time, their programmed coordination of that distribution reinforces their governance of the interactions that are exchanged and capitalized
through them, and for this, platforms resemble states. Platforms are often based on a
physical standardization of functional components that allows for more diverse and
unpredictable combinations within a given domain. On the macro scale, the intermixing of public-facing infrastructural investment and oversight tied up with the privatization of existing public services makes the political identity of platforms that much
more ambiguous.3 So long as those exchanges are regularized by passage through the
platform’s established forms, they enforce the optimization of interactions by binding
open exchanges between self-directed Users at the edges of its network. When those
forms are computational (as for Google), that passage is the capitalized translation of
interactions into data and data into interactions, and the movement of these into and
out of central locations (such as strongly defended data centers). As we will see, the
genealogy of platforms is diverse and seemingly contradictory. Roman urban planners,
the encyclopedia of John Wilkins, Charles Babbage, the Commissioners’ Grid Plan of
1811, John Maynard Keynes, Friedrich Hayek, Lady Ada Byron, Vint Cerf, and others,
all contribute to the parentage of platforms, and it is their eccentricity and exteriority from normal state and market institutional models, combining elements of these
as well as of machine engineering, that has made them so successful in redrawing the
effective terms of global systems.
Platforms demand an active conversion between economic and technical systems
and their respective limitations. Their initial program may be born of economics, but
their execution can push sideways through other models of value, confounding and
compressing the political spectrum along with them. Their history bears this out. A
working technical definition of platform, in general, may include references to a standards-based technical-economic system that simultaneously distributes interfaces through
their remote coordination and centralizes their integrated control through that same coordination.4 I will unpack this definition below. What I call platform logics refers first to
the abstracted systems logic of platforms (their diagrammatics, economics, geography,
and epistemology of transaction) and second to the tendency on the part of some
systems and social processes to transform themselves according to the needs of the
platforms that might serve and support them, both in advance of their participation
with that platform and as a result of that participation. Platforms provide an armature
and induce processes to conform to it. The Stack is a platform, or, more accurately, a
combination of platforms. Its own governing logics are derived from platform logics,

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

43

but its geography and geometry are also peculiar, and so while stacks are platforms,
not all platforms are stacks, and in fact most platforms are not stacks.
While systems that arguably operate as platforms might be found in every culture,
where does the concept of platform come from, specifically in relation to the development of modern machines? The etymology of platform refers to a “plan of action,
scheme, design” and, from the Middle French, platte form, or, literally, a plateau or
raised level surface. As Benedict Singleton writes, this conjoined with the plot, which
itself first implies a plot of land. Once situated on the platform of the stage, the “plot”
becomes a more abstract structure that situates characters into the forgone conclusion
of its unfolding, even as they suffer the choices that aren’t really theirs to make. As Singleton would have it, here the plot is a diagram that ensnares the Users of the platform
in its designs.5 By at least 1803, platform takes on more explicitly political meaning, as
in a “statement of party policies.” All three of these connotations (platform as a plan of
action, as a stage for a plot, and as proposed rules governance) are important for understanding The Stack as a platform and for platform sovereignty in general. One is set of
instructions, one is a situated place where action is played out according to plan, and
one is a framework for a political architecture. Already these connotations are slipping
and sliding into one another.
Now consider the word program. Its etymology refers first to a “public edict,” and in
the early modern era, it also comes to mean variously a plan or scheme, a list of events
to be presented, a menu of proposed political ideas, and a way to organize how people
will occupy architectural space. Only after World War II does “to program” mean “to
write software.” For architecture, computation, and politics, the “program” has central significance as a design problem and governing technique. The triangulation of
designed site, designed action, and designed polis traces that of “plot”: platform and
program overlay one another asymmetrically. For example, an architectural program
might be defined as an intended organization of Interfaces in a particular arrangement
so as to coordinate social contact and interaction (or prevent it). As a diagrammatic
image, an architectural program indexes the significance of that organization. A software program is a set of instructions that a designer gives to computational systems
with the intention of coordinating that system’s internal and external interfaces in
relation to itself, to compatible systems, and to Users. An interfacial image of that
program, usually the graphical user interface (GUI), summarizes, reduces, and makes
those instructions significant for Users. And clearly today, these two kinds of programs
intermingle. In many respects, what society used to ask of architecture—the programmatic organization of social connection and disconnection of populations in space
and time—it now (also) asks of software. We will return to that shift more than once
in the following chapters, and we will have to question what is or isn’t the remaining
work of physical architecture in light of this. Among what remains is the active contingency of programs, both hard and soft.

44

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

A recognition of platforms as a third institutional form, along with states and markets, situates the convergence of its architectonic and computational forms in a more
specific and fundamental way. A central argument of this book is that the “political
program” is not only to be found in the legal consensus (or dissensus) and policy
admonitions of traditional “politics” but also in machines directly. This is where the
global-scale arrangement of planetary-scale computing coheres into The Stack, and
how the convergence of the architectural and computational design logics of program
directly contributes to that system. For our purposes it is far less important how the
machine represents a politics than how “politics” physically is that machinic system.
The construction of platforms draws in, to varying and contingent degrees, strong connotations of “design” (design as in to “designate,” and to govern through material
intervention) and, in this platforms are plots, and (per Singleton) also diagrams that
“ensnare” actors in their fatal outcomes (design as in “to have designs on something,”
to trap the User just so). At the same time, platforms are not master plans, and in many
respects, they are the inverse. Like master plans, they are geared toward the coordination of system Interfaces into particular optimized forms, but unlike them, they do
not attempt to fix cause and effect so tightly. Platforms are generative mechanisms—
engines that set the terms of participation according to fixed protocols (e.g., technical,
discursive, formal protocols). They gain size and strength by mediating unplanned and
perhaps even unplannable interactions. This is not to say that a platform’s formal neutrality is not strategic; one platform will give structure to its layers and its Users in one
way, and another in another way, and so their polities are made. This is precisely how
platforms are not just technical models but institutional models as well. Their drawing
and programming of worlds in particular ways are means for political composition as
surely as drawing a line on a map. However, as opposed to the public rights of citizens
in a polis and the private rights of homo economicus in a market, we are severely lacking
in robust and practical theory of the political design logic of platforms, even as they
remake geopolitics in their image (or demand a different language to describe what the
political is now or ever was). What we can know from the outset is that an essential
logic of platforms is a reconvergence of architectural, computational, and political connotations of “program” back into one: the design logic of platforms is the generative
program that is equally all three types at once.
At a more mechanical level, a platform is also a standardized diagram or technology.
Its structure and the paths of interoperability that hold it together can’t be considered outside of the regularization and rationalization of how it connects to the outside
world. As infrastructure, a platform’s regularity is often guaranteed less by laws than
by technical protocols, and this is one of several ways that the sovereign decision is
built into the platform’s interfacial partitions and surfaces. This kind of intrasystemic
standardization was essential to the epochal metatechnologies of industrialization
and post-Fordism, revolutionizing the manufacture, distribution, and consumption of

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

45

massive quantities of identical tangible and intangible items. Because protocols are in
place to standardize physical and immaterial properties of integral components and
discontiguous manufacturing processes—from the width and direction of grooves in
a screw, to the costs of stamps and the nomenclature of international postal zones,
longitudinal mean times, cryptographic keys for international monetary transfers, stochastic synchronization of data transfers, and so on—the pace and predictability of
industrialization could unfold as it did.6 Artificial standardizations become naturalized
as if they were always the measure of things. This kind of complementarity between
technique and thought is familiar to adepts of Michel Foucault, Max Weber, Friedrich
Kittler and Sam Walton. Standardization drives logistics, and logistics in turn enables
geopolitical ambition and momentum. Innovations in munitions standardizations,
allowing soldiers to quickly disassemble and repair guns on the battlefield with standard parts, contributed for better or worse to American military prowess in the nineteenth century and its ability to defend a hemispherical doctrine posited by a Virginia
farmer, James Monroe. We appreciate the role of railroads, telegraphy, and telephony
networks as the infrastructure of globalization, and their speed for the acceleration of
the modernities of space and time, but perhaps we underappreciate the metastructuring importance of mundane anonymous standards to turn isolated mechanical inventions into infrastructural innovations (e.g., railroad gauges and spike lengths, timetable
templates, the semiotics of graphical interface feedback conventions, transmission line
materials, arbitrary telegraphic languages, packet-switching protocols, country codes
and area codes, the fixed numeration of money itself, and so on). The centrifugal standardization of how individual components interrelate and assemble into higher-order
systems, whether physical or informational, is as important as what any part or component may be. This is how platforms can scale up. To engineer systems that coordinate
the shuttling of units from one point to another with efficiency, adaptability, and flexibility is to compose within the rules laid down by other systems, larger and smaller,
with which interaction is required. If two different systems share common protocols,
then the subsystems of one can interoperate with subsystems of another without necessarily referring to any metasystemic authority. Systems swap material in this way,
such that intermodality and intramodality come to enable one another: no standards,
no platform; no platform, no Stack.
The design of protocols, platforms and programs can be as speculative as needed,
but the generativity of standards remains. Protocological interoperability works not
only to componentize tangible things, but also to represent undetermined relations
between things, events, and locations and to provide the means to compose that traffic in advance. In some cases, these are formal notational systems, and the most ingenious are not always the most widely adopted, and sometimes those adopted become
so naturalized that they disappear into the fabric.7 By design, systemic standardization is enforced by fixed physical measurement and procedure, and perhaps here most

46

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

particularly, the paradoxical tendency of platforms to control and decontrol at the
same time is most evident. For example, the formal urban grid in a major city is for
the most part rigid and inflexible, but precisely because of this linear and universally
authoritarian topography, it affords both maximum tumult of dynamic horizontal
interchange in the street plan as well as vertical recombinant programmatic complexity in the skyscrapers that pop up in each of its cells (more on this in the City layer
chapter).8 Similarly, it is the legal and practical standard size of the humble paper envelope that makes it possible for it to shuttle messages both discrete and discreet; like the
urban grid, the envelope’s power is in its dumbness. In the 1970s as the world’s cities
began to more fully merge into the networked hierarchies of today with the widespread
standardization of very-large-scale envelopes, made of steel instead of paper, in the
form of fixed proportion and attribute shipping containers. Containerization migrated
the packet switching from telecommunications onto the transit of physical objects (or
perhaps the other way around). It traded the standardized, linear traffic program of the
grounded asphalt grid for another, now smoothed into liquid shipping lanes, pacing
big packets of objects back and forth across the avenues of oceans.
10. How Platforms Work
Platforms centralize and decentralize at once, drawing many actors into a common
infrastructure. They distribute some forms of autonomy to the edges of its networks
while also standardizing conditions of communications between them. Many of the
defining cultural, political, and economic machines of our time operate as platforms
(from Google to transnational political theologies). Platforms are formally neutral but
remain, each and every one, uniquely “ideological” in how they realize particular strategies for organizing their publics. They are identified with neoliberalism (not without
reason), but their origins lie as much within the utopian megastructures of 1960s experimental architecture, counterculture cybernetics, Soviet planning schemes, and many
other systems of sociotechnical governance, both realized and imagined. Platforms are
infrastructural but rely heavily on aesthetic expression and calibration. A platform’s
systems are composed of interfaces, protocols, visualizable data, and strategic renderings of geography, time, landscapes, and object fields. For stack platforms, they also
include a predominant architecture of interoperable layers. Even as the majority of
the information they mediate may be machine-to-machine communication (as, for
example, today’s Internet), the specific evolution of any one platform, in the ecological
niche between the human and inhuman, depends on how it frames the world for those
who use it. It draws some things in and draws other things out, but foremost a platform
is a drawing and framing machine. Our interest, however, is not to critique platforms
as aesthetic works but to identify the work that aesthetics does in their development,

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

47

and through this to clarify how some existing (and potential) platforms are worthy of
our critiques.
Platforms might be analyzed in many different ways, and another book might make
a more thorough contribution to a very needed general theory of platforms than this
one can. In order to discuss The Stack as a platform, however, it is necessary to identify
some typological characteristics that all platforms might share in common. These would
characterize platforms in relation to other technologies (such as individual machines,
executable programs, fixed infrastructure, legal mechanisms, or social norms) and in
relation to other institutions (such as states, bureaucracies, and corporations). I list here
seventeen criteria and qualities of platforms (a nice prime number). The list is by no
means final or exhaustive, but taken as a whole, the shape and function of platforms
as both technical and political-economic forms are more clearly specified, especially
in relation to The Stack. Some of the criteria listed look like basic principles of secondorder cybernetics, others of software application design, and others of any networkssavvy political science. As such, “platform theory” is probably less about inventing new
attributes from scratch than it is about observing that recognizable common practices
already do constitute platforms as an institutional and technical norm at the scale of
states and markets:
1. As opposed to other macrogovernance institutions, platforms do not work according to detailed premeditated master plans; rather they set the stage for actions to unfold
through ordered emergence. Bureaucracies, by contrast, are systems that are also dependent on strict protocols and interfaces, but they operate by premodeling desired outcomes and then working backward to codify interactions that would guarantee these:
means are a function of ends. Platforms begin by fixing equally strict means but are
strategically agnostic as to outcomes: ends are a function of means.
2. Platforms are based on a rigorous standardization of the scale, duration, and morphology
of their essential components. The simplicity and rigidity of these standards make platforms predictable for their Users, but also allow them to support idiosyncratic uses that
platform designers could never predict. The formal politics of platforms is characterized by this apparent paradox between a strict and invariable mechanism (autocracy of
means) providing for an emergent heterogeneity of self-directed uses (liberty of ends).
The emergent politics of any one platform may largely be a function of how it strategizes the relationship between standards calibration and the perceived self-interests of
its stakeholders.
3. This standardization of essential components produces an effect of generative entrenchment by which one platform’s early consolidation of systems (formats, protocols, and
interfaces) decreases a User’s opportunity costs to invest more and more transactions
into that particular platform, while it increases the costs to translate earlier investments into another platform’s (at least partially) incompatible systems.9 The ongoing

48

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

consolidation of systems and reduction of transaction costs leverages that advantage
toward increasing the robustness of that platform’s unique requirements.
4. Standardized components may also be reprogrammable within constraints by Users,
allowing them to innovate new functions for machines that are composed, at least
partially, of preexisting platform systems. The systematic reuse of platform systems
allows for the development of complex products based on virtual components, reducing development risks, costs, and project duration. For that innovation, the ratio of
what is newly introduced by the User versus what is reused from existing platform
systems may be extreme in either direction, though neither ratio directly corresponds
to the intrinsic novelty of any one innovation’s new functions.
5. The design and governance of platforms often relies on formal models to organize,
describe, simulate, predict, and instrumentalize the information under its management. Those models may represent a rigorously discrete view of the platform’s internal
operations, its external environment, or, most likely, some combination of the internal
and the external that measures platform performance according to metrics evaluating
its outward-facing systems.10
6. Platforms’ mediation of User-input information may result in an increase in the value
of that information for the User. Platform network effects absorb and train that information, making it more visible, more structured, and more extensible for the individual
User or in relation to other Users who make further use of it, thereby increasing its social
value. At the same time, it is likely the platform itself that derives the most significant
net profit from these circulations in total. Each time a User interacts with a platform’s
governing algorithms, it also trains those decision models, however incrementally, to
better evaluate subsequent transactions. An economically sustainable platform is one
for which the costs of providing systemic mediation are, in the aggregate, less than the
total value of input User information for the platform. Platform economics provides
then two surpluses: (1) User surplus, in which the information is made more valuable
for the User once involved with the platform at little or no direct cost to that User, and
(2) platform surplus, that is, the differential value of all User information for the platform is greater than the costs of providing the platform to Users.11
7. Like centralizing systems, platforms consolidate heterogeneous actors and events
into more orderly alliances, but they themselves are not necessarily situated in a true
central position in relation to those alliances in the same way that, for example, a master planning committee or federal capitol building would be. Like some decentralized
systems, platforms rationalize the self-directed maneuvers of Users without necessarily
superimposing predetermined hierarchies onto their interactions. The centralizationversus-decentralization dichotomy may therefore be illusory in many cases (and not in
others) in that the choke points where a platform incentivizes commitment and leverages its advantages over other options may be even more widely distributed than all of
the Users that it organizes.

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

49

8. The generic universality of platforms makes them formally open to all Users, human
and nonhuman alike. If the User’s actions are interoperable with the protocols of the
platform, then in principle, it can communicate with its systems and its economies. For
this, platforms generate User identities whether they are desired or not. Platforms can provide
identities to Users who would otherwise not have access to systems, economies, territories, and infrastructures, such as a person who is not recognized as a political “citizen” by a location, but who is nevertheless included in communication by platforms
that are agnostic to the legal status of its Users. At the same time, platforms can also
name, enumerate, track, and capitalize the identity of Users who would rather remain
anonymous. For the former, the required provision of User identity may be seen as an
advantage of platforms and for the latter as a disadvantage.
9. Even as platforms guarantee identities to the Users of its systems, for better or worse,
they do not provide these evenly or equally. A platform governs one User differently than it
does another. An Interface that may open a space for one User also closes it off to another.
An interface that may be open for one User at one moment may be closed at another.
This differential is a core technique of how platform sovereignties normalize the exceptional reversibility of the partition. What may be an interiorizing partition (“enclave”)
for one User at one moment may be an exteriorizing partition (“camp”) for another at
another moment.
10. An ideal platform architecture is one that produces a strategic minimum of new
content into its own communication economy. An ideal platform is like an empty diagram
through which Users mediate new and archived information. A search engine, for example,
does not produce new Internet content for its Users, but rather structures the value of
content that other Users produce. (If medicine were reconceived as a platform, it would
obviously provide new critical information to Users, that is, patients and doctors, as well
as organize medical knowledge to date, but it would, in principle, focus the point at
which new diagnostic or therapeutic expertise is most crucially required and support it
with, for example, highly structured patient data and precedents from the literature).12
11. Any structuring component of an ideal platform architecture is replaceable by a new
component, and so the platform could, piece by replaced piece, evolve into something
entirely different while retaining its essential shape. As in Theseus’s paradox, every
plank of wood in a mariner’s ship is replaced over time by new wood, and yet the new
ship occupies the same virtual place as the old ship and so it still is “Theseus’s ship.”
The same operation holds for platform architecture. Any given component (e.g., layer,
protocol, interface) could be replaced, inclusive eventually of all components of the
platform in its totality.
12. Platforms may respond to User inputs immediately and may draw on archived rules
to recursively govern those interactions in real time, or it may act back on those interactions only once some qualitative or cumulative threshold requirement has been met,
perhaps by many Users at once. Platforms govern both instantaneously and cumulatively.

50

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

13. Ideal platforms not only act on new interactions according to programmed rules
and in relation to archived structured information, but also serve as distributed sensing
systems that incentivize the detection of errors (or mere anomalies), which are interpreted by
the platform’s formal models. In principle, what are interpreted as errors will not only
update the model’s description of the whole, but will also correct the rules by which
future interactions are governed. Ideal platforms also treat anomalies not only as errors
but as signals of emergent patterns or norms for which some new positive accommodation may be required.
14. The competition between platforms may occur over new tabula rasa space or over
the recomposition of one or more existing systems in accordance with a platform’s
strategy. To date, many successful platforms are those that provide Users with new capabilities by making their existing systems more efficient. Platforms that organize existing
systems and information tend to achieve generative entrenchment more quickly than those
that seek to introduce new systems from scratch. Users will make tactical use of some
platform interfaces to link some existing systems, and in doing so they are incentivized
to incorporate more of their own interests within these systems. Subsequent Users are
incentivized to link their systems to benefit from the network effects set in motion by
earlier Users, who in turn enjoy increasing network benefits as more User systems are
incorporated over time. The platform is able to realize platform surplus value from this
generative entrenchment.
15. Platforms link actors, information, and events across multiple spatial and temporal
scales at once. Platform ubiquity makes it more robust in relation to some threats, both intrinsic and extrinsic, and more vulnerable in relation to others. A platform’s ability to defend
one component or even replace it when it is no longer useful can make the whole
more resilient, but it can also then leave individual components vulnerable. The integrated architecture of the platform may also allow internal component-to-component
feedback loops to cycle out of control, amplifying the destabilization of the whole
apparatus.
16. A platform’s actual processes may be very different from how they are understood
by their Users, who may form mental images of those processes based on their own
individual interactions or on how the platform has represented itself to them. Platforms
don’t look like how they work and don’t work like how they look. For example, a User may
understand his or her own interactions with the platform according to the content
hierarchies of a GUI that bears almost no relation to how the platform actually structures or sees that interaction. Architects of a typical Cloud-based platform may organize the system according to the provision (and strategic throttling) of data through
application programming interfaces (APIs) that make many different kinds of platform
effects possible, the sources of which may be opaque to the most common Users or even
to other components of the system.

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

51

17. Platform sovereignty may be planned or unplanned, universal or specific, generative or reactive, technologically determined or politically guaranteed. Platform sovereignty is automatic under some circumstances and highly contingent under others, and it may
function differently in relation to different components of the platform system. The conditionality of these is a function of how platforms relate to other political, technical, and
economic institutions that also manage something (or someone) that is also organized
by that platform. When two or more platforms mediate the same thing, site, or person,
both making claims on it and providing sovereignty to it, then the two sovereignties
generated may be mutually constrained. While one of these forms of sovereignty may
be universal in relation to the platform that issues it (always subject to the inversions
and reversals noted above), it is also only partial and provisional in relation to other
platforms (if it is even recognizable by them at all). These differences may be between
how two platforms identify the same thing or between how two different components
of the same platform (or different components of different platforms) address that
thing. While this multiplication prevents any one User from enjoying unlimited universal sovereign privileges, it also tends to prevent any one platform from capturing
all sovereignty-generative components within its whole and monopolizing how sovereignty is made, and for whom and what.
To further outline the platform principle, others can add to and modify this provisional list. Some may want to include, for example, demonetization: how platforms
sometimes strip certain things of their scarcity and hence exchange value. Some may
focus on how platform design can never account for the accidents that actual platforms
bring, but also conclude that well-designed platforms can turn accidents into assets.
Some may want to specify how and when a User has rights of exit and entrance from
and to platforms. Can you leave, and can you get in? Others may want to explore the
organizational logics of technical platforms as exemplified by street grids, punch cards,
spreadsheets, circuit boards, and so on. Others may come at it from the other side
and ask whether standardization works best when predictable outcomes are desired,
whereas customization works best when not, and ask how the generic quality of platforms can and cannot do both at once. The Stack is a machine that becomes a state, but
it is also how both become platforms, or at least, as one condition around which their
armatures are forced to evolve in relation to platforms. As we will see in the chapters
ahead, as platforms like The Stack appropriate technologies of sovereignty previously
guaranteed to and by the state, the contemporary coevolution of these organizational
forms may be punctuated by new disequilibriums. First, we need to better understand
the genealogy of platforms as political models and how they have been deployed (successfully and unsuccessfully) as political machines.

52

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

11. Stack as Model
Stacks are a kind of platform that also happens to be structured through vertical interoperable layers, both hard and soft, global and local. Its properties are generic, extensible,
and pliable; it provides modular recombinancy but only within the bounded set of its
synthetic planes. It is an autogenerative parametric topography, but one that grows
precisely through an initial subdivision of technologies into planar layers and then
through an autocratic consolidation and rationalization of these through internal
interfaces and protocols. As for any platform, that consolidation is driven less from
centrally planned legal prescription than through the algorithmic conduction of selfdirected behaviors by free-range Users. The Stack discussed in the following chapters is
a vast software/hardware formation, a proto-megastructure built of crisscrossed oceans,
layered concrete and fiber optics, urban metal and fleshy fingers, abstract identities
and the fortified skins of oversubscribed national sovereignty. It is a machine literally
circumscribing the planet, which not only pierces and distorts Westphalian models
of state territory but also produces new spaces in its own image: clouds, networks,
zones, social graphs, ecologies, megacities, formal and informal violence, weird theologies, all superimposed one on the other. This aggregate machine becomes a systematic
technology according to the properties and limitations of that very spatial order. The
layers of The Stack, some continental in scale and others microscopic, work in specific
relation to the layer above and below it. As I have suggested, the fragile complementarity between the layers composing The Stack is discussed both as an idealized model
for how platforms may be designed and as a description of some of the ways that
they already work now. The metaphor and the machine are diagrams made real in the
megastructure.
If you start looking for them, “stacks” are everywhere. In a way, the Earth itself is a
spherical stack, from its molten core, to the lower and upper mantle, to the crust on
which organic life evolved under the troposphere, stratosphere, mesosphere, thermosphere, and exosphere. Humans evolved between two and only two of these layers.
Charles and Ray Eames’s famous “Powers of Ten” films for IBM showed generations
of high school students how to start from one everyday spot and from there think
down to 10-9 meters and up to 1023 meters, from quarks to walls of galaxies, and back
again. In a way, their presentation is a kind of telescoping stack. Archaeology organizes and depicts the temporality of unearthed assemblages according to the Harris
matrix, and its interlocking principles of original horizontality, original continuity,
and stratigraphic succession. The Marxian model of base and superstructure provided
another verticalized image of social totality, whereby economic structural causality
flows bottom-up, from foundational technical processes of production, valuation, and
relations in the base, to their ultimate expression in cultural and political institutions,
as superstructure. Marx wanted to model historical cause and effect, but history is full

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

53

of images of society organized instead into static stratified layers of arbitrary hierarchies
(Albrecht Dürer’s 1515 woodcut The Triumphal Arch of Maximilian I comes to mind).
Many contemporary technical systems work on stack principles, including smart grids
that segment a power layer, below a communications layer, below optimization and
applications layers. Examples are plentiful, and while some are recognizable as software
stacks, others are fuzzier, more heterarchical than hierarchical.13 Beyond software, is
the generic composability of any one layer in relation to another within a generative
vertical platform that may help qualify systems as stacks.
Stack architectures are also conceptual strategies for design, not just for description,
and they are not only conceptual architectures, they are models for actual architecture as well. Le Corbusier’s Five Points toward a New Architecture is a strong stack, as
embodied in Villa Sovoye and the vertical platform for five essential but undetermined
programs.14 The building may be “a machine for living in,” but the Five Points stack is
the machine for making machines. Constant’s ever-changing New Babylon speculative
urban system was redesigned again and again over the span from Sputnik to the OPEC
embargo. It changed shape constantly, but one durable characteristic was the notion of
a new city designed on top of the old one in two exclusive stacked layers. It imagined
the new city as a landscape of vast multilayered networks and as continuous territories
of ludic interfaces and opportunities, defined not by relation to a master ground plane
but to the horizontal and oblique vectors of movement up and down the exploded
sectional program. It was to be based not on functional regulation but on the feedback
systems of play and serendipitous interaction. This project in turn inspired Rem Koolhaas’s revision and expansion of Mies van der Rohe’s sectional diagram into a generic
principle of scale, for which the vertical juxtaposition of unlike programs in a single
structure allows them to interoperate with as much mutual transparency or opacity
as might be required, or which could be staged for optimizing spatial performance.
This is seen perhaps most dramatically in the horizontal skyscraper OMA’s (Office of
Metropolitan Architecture) 1972 conceptual project, Exodus: Voluntary Prisoners of
Architecture, in which residents pass from layer to layer as they move through the discrete biopolitical stages of their lives.15 Other architectural stacks are even more graphically explicit, such as Gordon Matta-Clark’s slices through stories of buildings, Robert
Smithson’s concentric-layered world maps, and the stratified landscapes of MVRDV’s
Hannover 2000 exposition pavilion that stacked and segmented artificial nature and
program into a hyperdense world-in-a-box. Elsewhere, stack perspectives erupt uninvited and unintended. The verticality of flattened systems is seemingly uncontainable.
While world maps render space in x- and y-axes, no linear geometry without thick
verticality could represent the most entrenched geopolitical conflicts, rational and irrational alike. Consider Israeli architect Eyal Weizman’s multidimensional maps of the
overlapping and interweaving claims of sovereignty in Israel-Palestine, showing that
no horizontal cartographic linear delineation, or any regular vertical elevation all by

54

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

itself, can finally describe, let alone govern, the multidimensional violence of that particular jurisdiction-intensive politico-theological matrix. Multiplications of the plane
and rotations of perspective that move the flattened into the vertical are prevailing.
Everywhere are stacks, good ones and bad ones, big ones and little ones, and many of
them agglomerating into larger and larger platforms.
The architecture of The Stack, this one particular megastructure of planetary-scale
computation, is an interoperable physical-informational system of systems, distributed
under, onto, and over the surface of the globe, with its layers organized into a patchy,
uneven vertical section. As said, The Stack is composed of geologic, humanistic, and
mineral layers charging feedback loops between these. As a cybernetic landscape, The
Stack composes both for equilibrium and for emergence, one oscillating into the other
for diagonal purposes in barely accountable rhythms. The state conditions (and literally
for governance, the condition of the States that its platform logics describe in advance)
are derived both from stacks as abstract diagrams and, through its unenumerated operations, as real existing machines. In turn the infrastructural sovereignties of The Stack
may, in principle, emerge from either of these. It can be derived from its career as accidental megastructure, which itself may or may not be the model for geogovernance to
come, or from its immediate, projective, and potential designability. It goes both ways.
Today, The Stack that we can analyze frames the one we can conceive, just as the one
we can conceive frames the one we are beginning to realize. Alternatives are conveyed
from its distortions.
The Stack’s disciplining of communication as an ecology of isomorphic techniques
makes the world appear as a system that demands from us a constant redesign of its
ever more granular interoperations. The history of these technologies is also then the
history of multiple competing communication standards. Protocol politics is always
rough trade because to control the standard is to influence the economies it enables,
which is to influence how they interrelate with other systems and the meta-economies
those interoperations in turn give rise to. As should be plain from current events, the
interweaving of otherwise incommunicative hard and soft systems into new assemblages continues apace, and so the politics of standards (e.g., open source, intellectual
property, net neutrality, encryption) becomes integral to the “democracy” of infrastructure and to the little sovereignties of everyday life. Looking back, it is not coincidental
then that formal systems theory and information theory appear historically concurrently and are part of the larger crest of cybernetics. The discernment of information
as a first-order principle of material difference in the twentieth century would come
to all but consume the very definition of systems tout court. The study of information
bridged linguistics, symbolic logic, biology, chemistry, art, literature, and the theory of
calculus with the practical engineering problems of automated logarithms, algorithms,
cryptography, and long-distance signal transmission relay. In turn, the modeling of
all of these and more as forms of information, as well as the conception of distributed

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

55

multimodel apparatuses ultimately as information systems, becomes an overriding
epistemological ambition of twenty-first-century globalization. This registration of all
systems as information systems a priori tracks software’s migration from military logistics to consumer footprints. In this enforced translation of any thing into the status of
information within a system, all things may possess their worlds and be possessed by
their worlds only to the extent that they possess the attributes necessary for intermodal
communication with other platform systems. Whether for bits or atoms, numbers or
nectarines, no impedance mismatch can disallow the activation of that intermodality,
and so compatibility within a given scale as well as the interoperability between scales,
becomes itself the critical vernacular definition of computability as an economic technology. As all systems come to mean information systems, then computation, which
otherwise might be defined differently, comes to refer to “algorithms holding systems
of information together.” The Stack, as a particular megastructure, emerges from this
history of systems conceived in relation to computation, and computation in relation
to systems. It has inherited some of its limitations, ambitions, accomplishments, and
blind spots and has evolved beyond others.
12. Stack as Political Machine
The emergence of planetary computation as a global and intelligent system can be
traced in broad strokes from perhaps Roman and Chinese military accounting, to
the first Victorian calculators through to today, and it is marked by celebrated breakthroughs as well as long-ignored dead ends, some of which are eventually celebrated
retroactively. By their appearances on the scene, it seems that every globalizing communication network, from printed books to telegraphy, railroads, radio, telephony, and
television, was celebrated (and lamented) as the coming of some universal political
community, messianic or degenerate or both. In their formative years, new regimes
of digital global media are as well invested and inflated with world-historical importance, as signaling the ultimate arrival of a too long postponed cosmopolitanism. (Both
Hegel’s political time and Kant’s political space were themselves conceived in intimate
proximity of that most modern of global mass media, the network body of the state,
which would continue to reinvent its own anatomy in relation to new media regimes.)
If we are more used to living so much of our lives inside the shells of planetary-scale
computational networks, we also observe that the political realities of universal global
information turn out to be far more problematic, more mundane, and unusual than
envisioned, feared, and hoped for. This disappointment itself may be the most timely
message of the medium, but not necessarily its most lasting. Perhaps the persistent
utopianism around communications infrastructure still works, not because of how well
it predicts the outcome of large-scale technological interventions, but because as the
genesis of productive accidents, it is able to make room for otherwise unauthorized

56

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

political and social forms in its wake. The Stack, like any other technology of such scale
and significance, both constitutes a new political-geographic order and enforces an
existing cultural-economic order already in place.16 It does each in different ways and
at different locations, and the untangling of these is part of the design brief. Toward
this, we have to do more than map platforms; we have to learn to read them and interpret them.
Conway’s law, coined in 1968 by programmer Melvin Conway, states that “organizations which design systems ... are constrained to produce designs which are copies of
the communication structures of these organizations.” Put differently, “in order for two
separate software modules to interface correctly, the designers and implementers of
each module must communicate with each other. Therefore, the interface structure of a
software system will reflect the social structure of the organization(s) that produced it.”
A corollary law might demonstrate that over time, the inverse is equally true: organizations come to take on the characteristics of their interfaces. If it goes both ways, then
homologies between organizer and organized make the detection of cause and effect
between cultural and technical systems rather difficult. For example, and to extend this
problem to the largest scale, an understanding of the ongoing emergence of planetaryscale computation cannot only be understood as a secondary technological expression
of capitalist economics.17 The economic history of the second half of the twentieth century is largely unthinkable without computational infrastructure and superstructure.
In accounting for that transformation, it is not at all clear whether the computational
technologies are more or less foundational than the economics that organized them
and that they organize (even assuming that we could analytically separate the two, so
as to put one in the fore and the other in back). Instead of locating global computation
as a manifestation of an economic condition (as both its means of production and its
superstructural expression), the inverse may be equally valid. From this perspective, so
much of what is referred to as neoliberalism are interlocking political-economic conditions within the encompassing armature of planetary computation. The entwined
polar positions of Sunnyvale, Caracas, Beijing, Brussels, Tribeca, and Tel Aviv don’t
integrate capital and resource markets into network societies on their own, but are
themselves “computed” into these arrangements. Either way, it is possible to delineate
structural causality between technological and socioeconomic systems only in model
abstractions, because one always contains the other and is contained by the other
at once. We cannot, for example, finally locate computation technologies as a base
and information culture as a superstructure, bound together either through capitalintensive modes of production and exchange or through computational flows directly
determining systems of valuation and exchange in their image. Rather, we could do
so, but only with abstractions that are easily turned inside out. Neither serves as the
last instance of the other, though today, neither can be defined without the other.
Instead, we should work with this mesh on its own less mechanistic terms. Jameson, for

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

57

example, offers an injunction to treat such arrangements as active temporal operations
rather than as a fixed architecture, “basing-and-superstructuring.”18 We may think of
foundation as a verb, base-ing, and to seek out how specific material technical systems
come to take on causal force and when the same do not. Such flexibility might allow
us to differentiate, for example, when the discursive structure of the relational database
drives not only the information access policies of a company or state, but also in turn
the form of its organizational hierarchies, and when the inverse is predominantly true,
such as when the laws and logistics of trade channels structure the form and content of
interoperable supply chain management software and the database designs on which
it depends. In locating The Stack within the intercourses of economics, culture, and
technology, both Conway’s law (that organizations design systems in their image) and
our inverse Conway’s law (that systems and their interfaces produce organizations in
their image) are interpretive tools that are useful to keep at hand.
As a platform to be read and interpreted, The Stack clearly sits on both sides of this
coupling of culture and technology. It relies on software as both a kind of language and
a kind of technology, of algorithms of expression and the expression of algorithms,
and this twisting of the conceptual and the machinic can sometimes bring emotional
distress.19 For some, an apparently universal convertibility of social systems into software systems motivates euphoric convictions in the instantaneous self-realization of
networked individuals, a particularly Californian enthusiasm spanning from the ingenious to the idiotic. (The so-called California Ideology is not what I am referring to
here. That term was always a simplistic New Left chestnut that crudely lumped Survival Research Laboratories and Page Mill Road venture capitalists into one cohort.)20
However, the extremities of convictions also give way to a more nuanced complex of
platforms that not only augment force and authority but constitute first-order modes
of authority on their own (they are discussed in following chapters). These are the
geographic powers to be further decided and designed, or left to go stale and rot on
their own. For example, the ability of some platforms to absorb and recognize patterns
in end User behavior might mimic how markets resolve fluctuations of price, but its
formal centralization also allows for higher-level forms of planning, investment, and
equity that states are, ostensibly, steering on their own. Contemporary Cloud platforms
are derived from more specific systems of user-facing interfaces and services (discussed
at length in the Cloud chapter). The intelligence of User interactions provides core content that is aggregated, optimized, and made more visible, more immediate, more standardized, more interoperable, more mobile, and therefore more valuable both to Users
and to the platform than it would be otherwise. How far can that go?
For some, the capacity for platforms to operate in this way suggests striking similarities with the hopes of socialist planners to engineer a pricing and planning mechanism
that could observe, analyze, calculate, produce, and distribute materials and goods
according to principles of rational evaluation instead of the anarchic vagaries of supply

58

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

and demand.21 Francis Spufford’s 2010 historical novel, Red Plenty, did much to respark
interest in this overlooked period in the history of political computer science, and in
Khrushchev- and Brezhnev-era Soviet economists and cyberneticians in particular.22
At that time, planners and programmers had access to what is by today’s standards
minuscule computing capacity to calculate patterns, pathways, and contingencies, but
contemporary supercomputing systems not only could orchestrate and optimize the
pricing and dissemination requirements of large economies; they do it every day.23
Those planners and programmers also labored under centralized authoritarianism, and
so for our efforts to plot out where else platform economies can be made to go and
what alternatives to Anthropocenic economics are possible, it is not suggested that we
look back on midcentury regimes for all the key clues. However, the clear homologies
between the aspirations of Soviet cybernetics and the accomplishments of Google, for
example, to model and govern superpower-scale digital economies, and the genealogies that link the latter to the former, at least testify against the notion of an intrinsic
bond between capitalism and computational megaplatforms. We may anticipate that
to some significant extent, the dovetailing of the future evolution of both agendas will
transform one another and may even allow one to fully envelop the other: neither
state as machine nor market as machine because the platform is state, market, and
machine at once. Some Marxian articles of faith (such that once global technological
means of production and valuation have reached some threshold level of efficiency and
ubiquity, such that continuance of management by capital is not needed, then things
will give way to a self-regulating infrastructural commonwealth) may have surprising
interpretive value for the next century even if it works out in ways utterly different than
originally and normally conceived. As many on the left and the right have postulated,
the acceleration of capital flows through computational megaplatforms such as these
may, in the long run, do as much to undermine the modern function of exchangeable
property as it does to radicalize it (and perhaps the former because of the latter). We will
have to wait and see what will and will not “wither away” should planetary-scale computation approach peak platform optimization and ubiquity, but in the meantime, we
have other historical examples of proto-Stack governments to consider and to interpret.
13. Stacks That Were and Might Have Been
In 1970, British cybernetician Stafford Beer was commissioned by Unidad Popular, the
new socialist Chilean government of Salvador Allende, to design the platform for a new
computer-controlled economy, a project that came to be known as Project Cybersin
(the name is a conjunction of “cybernetics” and “synergy”).24 The proposed network
would have organized the entire Chilean economy according to, among others techniques, a twelve-layer concentric platform model, running from the worker himself
(center layer), to successive layers of the crew, workshop, department, firm, line, sector,

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

59

branch, industry, state economy, central government, and finally enveloped by the
twelfth, and final, layer of the whole nation. As seen in Beer’s diagrams, layers in the
system could recursively influence layers it surrounded, with any one factory floor or
shipping port location sending status information regularly into the platform by a
network of telex machines. This feedback loop seems like rocks and sticks compared
to today’s multivariate stochastic logistical lattices, but in the early 1970s, it was practically science fiction. Neither that Cybersin network nor its planned control room
straight from Captain Kirk’s bachelor pad survived the Pinochet coup. The Chilean
army and its sponsors apparently didn’t see much value in flat, decentralized economic
ecologies sutured by cutting-edge information networks. Hmm.25 Beer’s “stack” was
based on his viable system model, “a five-tier structure based on the human nervous
system, which Beer believed existed in all stable organizations—biological, mechanical,
and social.” Biological system metaphors map onto modern social theory in diverse
ways and while some emphasize equilibrium, others emphasize emergence.26 For Beer’s
Project Cybersin, it was the latter. The aspiration of the platform was to constitute and
compose a systemic state condition, literally a socialist nation-state condition, and
bring it into being. The platform sovereignty attempted by his stack was generative
ex nihilo. Unlike the deeply centralized planning mechanisms of the Soviet Gosplan,
the reporting, planning, and coordination of Cybersin’s architecture was meant to be
decentralized and democratic. Beer himself was less interested in Marxian theory of history than in the revolutionary potential of autopoietic cybernetics as a form of governance, and the presumed effect of information flows to make systems less hierarchical,
more composable, more vital and durable.
Meanwhile in Japan, a platform of cybernetic equilibrium has been in continuous
development since 1984, one for which the normative apparatus of the nation and its
interpolation of objects and subjects within its industrial economy is presumed, reified, served, and conserved. Ken Sakamura’s TRON (an acronym for “The Real-Time
Operating system Nucleus”) is the basis for a “computer everywhere” infrastructure
that envisions a ubiquitous national computer network built on a distributed real-time
operating system among a vast network of objects and terminals of multiple scales and
complexities, a blend of an Internet operating system and Internet of Things communication formats with ubiquitous ID systems.27 In its heyday, TRON was an architecture
and interfacial framework by which parts of the whole national industrial system, from
cell phones to cars to factories to municipal infrastructure, could communicate and be
addressed by similar and related software frameworks. Those frames were forked and
developed as different subarchitectures, each incorporating a different subset of an overarching Japanese computational ecology: ITRON, JTRON, BTRON, CTRON, MTRON,
and STRON for mainframes, industrial uses, telecommunications, cell phones, end user
terminals, and on and on. The industrial variant, ITRON, for example, is widely used in
Japanese embedded systems. It was designed to be what Sakamura called “open-open”

60

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

in the communication between parts and components and freely available to be reprogrammed for specific implementations. Taken as a whole, TRON was considered at one
point “the most popular operating system in the world.”28 Its success, however, has
been limited by the insularity of the Japanese technical ecology, and the contiguity,
coherency, and delimitation of the Japanese state system.29 The ultimate boundary of
its walled garden would prove to be as unambiguous as an island’s border, and so the
growth of TRON was both enabled and curtailed by Japan’s Garapagosu-ka or “Galapagos syndrome.”
Sakamura’s stack was constituent and curatorial; Beer’s was constitutive and generative. Beer’s model posited a nested series of socioeconomic scales, from worker
to nation, through which regulated information would be reported, analyzed, and
governed. Sakamura’s model distributes operations among widely dispersed components sharing data directly or indirectly for separate uses (e.g., industrial, civic, interpersonal) and so lubricating intermodal communication between people and people,
people and things, and things and things. Beer’s and Sakamura’s visions are asymptotic. Both sought to design a platform infrastructure that would integrate a national
society by integrating its material economies into a master computational system, but
each is animated by a different conception of that task. Beer’s assignment was to help
engineer a new nation into being through cybernetics, and so the key diagrams of his
stack depict the socioeconomic scales that would come to participate through that system. For Sakamura’s Japan, the program of his stack is to intensify a national and cultural equilibrium already established, and so his images depict not a new social order
(as Japan’s organic stability could be presumed) but the technical network layers that
would be made to serve it. Beer’s diagram was of the macrosocial emergent effect of
platform sovereignties, and Sakamura’s was the inverse, a technical harmonization of
a social foundation. The constitutive design imagined the social and the cultural as an
effect of the technical intervention, and the constituent design imagined the technical
as a function of the social and cultural, and so here, both sides of software as language
and software as technology dichotomy are exemplified and mirrored. For The Stack,
the essential forces of the generative and the regulatory, equilibrium and emergence,
constitutive and constituent force, remain equally foundational for one another. The
Stack freezes, radicalizes, and reinforces models of governance and macroeconomics at
the same time as it dismantles them, builds geographies above and below them, and
undermines their ability to reproduce themselves. Sometimes it accomplishes one by
doing the other.
The ongoing design of The Stack is for an architecture that is equally technical and
conceptual, drawn by both its diffuse instrumentality and its physicalized abstractions.
It is well suited to reflect even politico-theological aspirations and can easily synthesize
an ideal liturgy of preferred signals and echo them back at specific Users (as discussed
in the Interfaces chapter), even as its ability to absorb and revalue new content (toward

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

61

inflation or deflation) is programmed to be agnostic and omnivorous as strategy dictates. As we conceive possible futures for The Stack platform, in what way might the
generative aspiration of Cybersin do more work for more Users than the curatorial aspiration of TRON, or vice versa? As ideal types, TRON is designed to optimize coherent
divisions, whereas Cybersin introduces communication across the boundaries of scale.
Cybersin focuses on the flow and valuation of goods and actions taken, and TRON on
the embedded intelligence of infrastructure and equipment. Cybersin seeks to enroll
all actors in the economy into its ongoing planning and evolution, while TRON seeks
to allow steering authority a more transparent chain of command. Beer and Sakamura
would likely agree, however, that any platform architecture will succeed not through
the premeditated ingenuity of its original schemes that will always prove too brittle,
but through how it is taught to accommodate and validate unforeseeable new programs, and to do so as simply as possible.
14. The Stack We Have
The Internet is built out on stacks not so dissimilar to these. Its eminence and its
monotony, both available in excess, are functions of the regularity and resiliency of
several specific “stacks,” variously abstract models and real technical machines. As its
stacks are far more pervasive and powerful than Cybersin and TRON, their dissection
demands more reading and interpretation. They are the result of work by well-known
scientists and engineers (more on them below), anonymous ingenious workarounds,
and coordinated tactical responses of established industrial Users. Equal measures of
emergence and equilibrium are at work in the interplay of anticipatory design and realtime problem solving. The shape of The Stack, our accidental megastructure (which
contains this Internet but also much more), is also built on some of these models and
their particular governing steerage of information networks. The history of Internet
stacks also makes clear that the authoring of architectures can produce metasystemic
accidents that in turn can themselves counterauthor and redesign the platform in
unintended but successful ways.
Consider the lessons of the OSI (open systems interconnection) network model and
the TCP/IP network model, on which global Internet connectivity is now largely based.
The specification of both standards began in the 1970s, and the latter was more fully
adopted by the mid-1980s. For OSI, the network represented has seven discrete layers,
from the application layer addressing Users at the “top” down to the physical layer
(which today may be fiber-optic cable channeling pulses of light). Below the application layer are, in descending sequence, the presentation layer, the session layer, the
transport layer, the network layer, the data link layer, and then the physical layer.
In simple terms, a message is sent by a user down the stack, layer by layer, until it is
transmitted laterally across the physical layer to the receiving node across the street

62

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

or across the ocean. Upon being received, the message travels back up the stack, from
the physical layer to the application layer, and is read by the next user. Each of the layers gathers, specifies, and links heterogeneous technologies together into a functional
stratum.30 On each layer, an instance provides services to and requests service from the
layers above and below, and can also pass information laterally to its corresponding
layer (i.e., network layer to network layer, as in many so-called level 2 networks linking
financial traders and trading centers). Key to the success of this modular model is its
flexibility in absorbing future technological innovations that can be introduced at any
given layer (e.g., fiber optics instead of copper wire at the physical layer, better router
software, an application with better features and security) without disrupting the existing components, so long as the new technology adheres to the protocols established
by the platform model that allow it to communicate with its vertically adjacent layers,
above and below. In principle any machine could be inserted in a layer of the network
if it can adhere to the necessary grammar that would allow it to communicate with its
most proximate neighbors. For The Stack, the OSI model serves as a literal and technical prototype for how network architectures operate between very small and large
scales and, as the primary abstraction, or universal diagram, for how its heterogeneous
participants can arrange communication in a vertical assemblage, now at a megastructural scale.
The network stacks conceived in the 1970s and 1980s by teams led by Vint Cerf
(TCP/IP) and Charlie Bachmann (OSI) (among many others) were designed to solve
complex but very specific transmission and communication problems. The big idea
was not to disrupt modern geopolitics. However, for The Stack, we recognize them
to represent a more universal topography and geographic machine, one that we may
come to see as having real effects of a similar order of magnitude as the loop topologies ratified at Westphalia. It must be said that for a book of design theory, The Stack
platform’s logical structure is far more important than the technical details of existing
networks, but one provides for the other. As indicated, however, a crucial consideration for these models was massively distributed infrastructural modularity as a way
to accommodate unplannable new demands and new machines within discrete layers
as the key to future growth of the system. For this they exemplify platforms far more
than master plans, and they are direct technologies for governance at least as much as
tools of governments. At the same time, the armature for that modularity guarantees
the predictability of these inclusions and the scalability of the whole, and so as for any
platform, the governing regularity of stack protocols is necessarily inflexible and regular. What is simplest and most fixed provides for Hermes’s ephemeral work of transit
and translation.
All of this is was and is highly contingent. It was quite possible that neither OSI nor
TCP/IP would become anything like a central systems mechanism for global communications. The standards wars of this era divided phone companies, which preferred a

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

63

system that would support discrete circuits between one sender and receiver, like older
telephony networks, versus many computing companies, such as IBM, which lobbied
hard for packet switching technologies that could treat all messages (e.g., voice, data,
image) as recombinant bits flowing over whatever future hardware that could connect
with the network. The models of communication (equally technical and social) posed
by both options contain profound downstream implications for the geopolitics of an
information society. A polity of circuits and a polity of packets are in epistemological
and functional opposition. For the circuit model, its stack is a bounded utility for which
use is metered by monopolistic caretakers who, by guaranteeing the circuit between
sender and receiver, retain de facto sovereignty over the channel. For the packet switching model, at least in the minds of Cerf’s group, the platform would prioritize the edges
of the network, asking them to do more of the work to reassemble transmitted packets
and calculate the content of messages. Cerf’s group presumed increasing computerization of networks from node to edge, but even more than its authors intended, their
model would depend on the exponential growth of the computational capacity of all
network equipment, soup to nuts (e.g., terminals, routers, servers), in order to bring
the network to life at a global scale. The greater the computational carrying capacity of
the entire network apparatus, the more information it can convey with greater speed,
and the more information it conveys, the more demand for capacity by organizations
increasingly reliant on its competitive efficiencies. In this way, Moore’s law is not just
the cause of the software society; it is also a contingent effect of a platform architecture
design decision.
Both OSI and TCP/IP are packet switching models, but for better or worse, the sevenlayer OSI model that Bachmann described never really took off. The simplified TCP/IP
four-layer model described by Cerf’s group did get traction, and based on those early
adoptions, the Internet as we know began in earnest.31 TCP/IP was ratified in 1980, and
besides compressing the stack geometry by combining the top three layers of the OSI
stack into one, it proved a much simpler and flexible solution for early industrial and
government network adopters.32 TCP/IP “won” not simply because its early adopters
were more visionary but because it just worked better to link together heterogeneous
existing systems and translating between them so that they could work as one. America’s factories were not linked by the organicist tissue of TRON; they were full of various
proprietary computing systems running mutually incompatible software. TCP/IP made
it much easier to design and implement general-purpose hardware and software that
could link all these together—as is—and thereby quickly realize gains in efficiencies
with the machines that managers already had. As more sites (and more nodes and more
Users) connected systems through this network platform (factories connected to suppliers to headquarters to warehouses and so on), the network became that much more
valuable to every connected User. As the platform that glued all these together became
more established, the opportunity cost of using alternatives such as OSI increased (a

64

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

good example of generative entrenchment). We see that platforms that allow for a
tactical appropriation to optimize existing systems have an advantage over those that
would appear from a tabula rasa, at least within this context for established industrial
systems. Over time, the entirety of those original economies and mechanisms may be
replaced bit by bit by new technologies and new communicative norms that are better
tuned to take advantage of the wider systems that emerge.
There are important lessons for The Stack from this history. By the relative simplicity
and rigidity of a modular architecture of translation, the platform gathered unlike and
unforeseeable users into its media, and only by translating any “content” into generic
information can it provide the effective universality of communication and exchange.
This gathering of unlike Users into a central system that can then govern the terms
of infrastructural and platform participation largely depends on how well it makes use
of computational ubiquity to amplify the agency of all the nodes, wherever they may
be. Perhaps most important, despite the fact that TCP/IP was intentionally authored as
a scalable platform, it rose to preeminence in the governance of networks not because
it was the most perfect, or because everyone voted for it, or because it was the most
legally sound; rather, it just worked to tactically glue together lots of different things
at different scales into more manageable and valuable forms. The same is basically true
of The Stack as an accidental megastructure. There was no one commission or council
whose vision authored it (though versions of it have appeared in dreams and nightmares for centuries). Its layers “just worked” for Users and platforms to make immediate tactical gains, and the accumulation of these trillions of maneuvers terraformed
the planet. As for “the Internet,” we still can’t really point to it as one network, or one
technology, or one stack. It is a conceptual assemblage of billions and billions of little
machines that we treat as one thing. The Stack, as well, doesn’t really exist per se, and
yet there it is.
The Stack is an engine for thinking and building. The architectural metaphor may
suggest an exclusive design for one given site, but it should direct us instead toward a
geometry in which different things occupy the same site at the same time and cohere
into a stable system because of this co-overlapping. The Stack is built of real things,
but how we conceptualize its totality depends on powers of aesthetic abstraction.
While machinic networks demand their own recognition and when formalized these
become infrastructural and platform sovereignties, the Stack diagrams these as techniques to use (or refuse) alternative political geographies but never allows for simplistic one-to-one correlations between one layer and one geopolitical operator. I am
not suggesting, for example, that China functions “like” the physical layer of the OSI
model or that Google functions “like” the application layer. Rather, different organs
of state and Cloud platforms intersect jaggedly. Their intersections on multiple layers
(e.g., Earth, Cloud, City, Address, Interface, User) can be understood through the model

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

65

lens of The Stack, not just as an unaccountable proliferation of exceptional enclaves,
exclaves, and liminal legal zones, but also as the topos (if not nomos) of a normative
order in which these very “exceptions” are regularized. It is a political geography for
which the vertical is on equal footing with the horizontal and demanding its overdue
tribute (their crisscrossing piling of jurisdictions, on-platform and off-platform, not
only works through The Stack; it is a stack). State and nonstate Cloud platforms can
operate both independently and interdependently, but their position is always now in
relation to one another and to what is above and below them. Our model is, we hope,
both a schematic map of this dynamic and a means for its retooling; it is infrastructure
that is also simultaneously a projective interface for its own recomposition and for a
geopolitics-to-come. It is a space of deep addressability nominating and enumerating
Users and interlocking their traces easily or uneasily across unnatural scales. Layers
are delimited like borderlines, invisible membranes just as arbitrary as their enforcements, but as they gather unlike technologies into their own level, they also fold their
lines around them into a frame. Especially at the Interface layer that draws Users into
the fold, their lines exude platform sovereignty through an intrinsic reversibility. This
nomic principle of The Stack persists.
The aspect of this book that qualifies as a design brief hinges on how The Stack
is already a larval geopolitical architecture and how its refashioning requires unexpected and uncomfortable redefinitions of what geopolitics might entail. As discussed
above, The Stack is at once a machine that becomes a state, and a political geography
that derives and is derived from the structure of that machine. The Stack includes
all the various planetary computational technologies we now build with fanfare, but
its significance is its reflection of the totality that emerges unintentionally. The platform sovereignties that it enables emerge in relation to material systems opened to
the subjective image of all User positions and identities that cohere around them. In
exploring the active contradictions of sovereignty in relation to emergent planetaryscale computation, we need a diagram of the global Stack that we have as it actually
is (e.g., electricity grids, mineral sourcing, strange interfaces, smart and dumb cities,
alien users) to give a technical specificity to our speculations on geopolitical and geosocial alternatives, but also to better abstract its scattered technical heterogeneity into
a fungible totality. What binds that analysis and that design to one another is that
while The Stack is a platform for computational networks and economies, it is also
a metaplatform that works to gather, support, and superimpose multiple totalities at
once (e.g., states, Cloud platforms, cities, projective political theologies). Each of these
positions is itself in slippery contact with The Stack’s layers, circumscribed by one and
shuttled between several. In so doing, it has repositioned itself in relation to other
little totalities along the way, creating and claiming some part of the territory of planetary computation.

66

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

Figure 3.1
Diagram by Metahaven of the six layers of The Stack.

15. The Layers of The Stack
How does this work? What is the model exactly? The Stack is divided into six layers,
moving from the global to the local, from geochemical up to the phenomenological:
Earth, Cloud, City, Address, Interface, and User. For The Stack, multiple layers co-occupy
the same terrestrial location (horizontally) but gather and subdivide their processes vertically into discrete machinic “jurisdictions.” That subdivisional geography is bound
within the mechanism of the platform, but at the same time, The Stack platform itself
disturbs existing models of jurisdiction and projects its own out into the world. Each
layer configures and coheres its own specific forms of governance over what it touches,

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

67

and so the difference between one layer and another is also a difference between those
forms and processes. That is, the Cloud layer is defined by certain spatial and temporal
demands that include what we conventionally recognize as Cloud infrastructure (e.g.,
data centers, fiber optics, and in-browser applications), but those demands may press
on rather unlike things as well (parking spaces, medical equipment, food supply statistics). The six chapters that follow discuss each one of these layers in sequence, detailing
especially how each produces its own governing logics of scale, physicality, textuality, embodiment, force, motion, stability, and, perhaps most important, how each of
these logics provides productive accidents that may direct us toward unexpected design
outcomes.
The diagram of The Stack in figure 3.1 shows a vertical-sectional relationship
between possible positions occupying all six layers at once. It demonstrates that while
positions on layers are held simultaneously, each layer governs that position semiautonomously. In the practice of real communication, any one instance of such a stack
works only in combination with another, and in this pairing, the real social form of
active stacks comes into focus. That structure of connection and communication is
similar to OSI or TCP/IP. Connections tunnel down, across, and back up stacks, creating temporary circuit-like connections in a U-shaped trajectory. User connects to User
by initiating a “message” that tunnels all the way down through the other layers to the
bottom and then back up again, and so direct communication between Users activates
all six layers down The Stack and then all six layers again back up The Stack. The whole
of the system is invoked and activated by any one connection; the whole is “folded”
into each single instance of activation, bending the universal and the particular into
one another. We define any one such path taken down and up The Stack in a U-shaped
trajectory as a column. For one “session,” however fleeting or stable, columns fix one
User to another by linking layers to those above and below into a whole, but they allow
anyone or anything that is a User to initiate (or be initiated by) as many other simultaneous columns as needed. That is, as any given column tracks up and down, there is
no final instance of vertical or horizontal integration that would truly and ultimately
resolve a User down to the Earth layer or Cloud layer for good. Any one User will initiate millions of different columns at different moments over time, thereby executing
different combinations of nested positions. This slipperiness does not correspond well
with modern logics of last-instance sovereignty and citizenship. It’s not that there is no
“there there” but rather that moment to moment, there are too many “theres” for any
one sovereign geography to finally decide all the others.
At the top of any column, a User (animal, vegetable, or mineral) would occupy its
own unique position and from there activate an Interface to manipulate things with
particular Addresses, which are embedded in the land, sea, and air of urban surfaces
on the City layer, all of which can process, store, and deliver data according to the
computational capacity and legal dictates of a Cloud platform, which itself drinks from

68

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

the Earth layer’s energy reserves drawn into its data centers. Paths between layers are
sutured by specific protocols for sending and receiving information to each other,
up and down, that do the work of translating between unlike technologies gathered
at each plateau. In this sense, each layer can then simulate and countersimulate the
operations of the other (for Users, Interfaces “simulate” the instrumental capacities of
the entire Stack, as the hard and soft networks of the Cloud and City are “translated”
one into the other). Their interlocking adherence to standard protocols guarantees the
linking of information up and down and between like layers (or even skipping layers
occasionally), and for this, an external application can enter into The Stack at any level
and begin to move between levels from that starting point. Any path from top to bottom is but one possible route among many others. For example, one path from Interface to Address may be very different from another from Address to City. There are any
number of possible links between User to Address, Interface to Cloud, and Earth to City,
or horizontally between the same layer of two stacks (i.e., City to City). The durable
form of one layer, in one context, might enable or prevent variation within another
layer, because different layers function with a contingent whole with greater or lesser
degrees of stability or variability. For example, identical configurations on the Cloud
layer of column may link very different contexts on the User layer that is necessarily
more responsive to dynamic cultural nuances.
In practical terms, two different Users may make use of the same Interfaces and
Addresses within the same City, but each may have very different privileges and limitations at the Cloud layer. As that may be the layer on which it is most decisively perched,
a state may see what the Cloud layer can see (and not what it can’t see) in the recursive
path up and down the columns that are visible to that particular layer’s techniques of
perception and its own dispositions of looking. At the top layer, because no two Users
have the same level of privilege and access within the space of possibilities in which a
particular column might form, political tension pulls tight around that difference. Perhaps then the ultimate identity of any one User within The Stack could be calculated by
those limitations that contrast one User to its neighbors plus the patterned aggregation
of the columns it has activated over time (not unlike how today’s commercial Cloud
platforms track and model their subscribers). For any User a particular position on one
layer might guarantee a corresponding position on another layer, or might disqualify
it altogether; not only are layers technically interdependent, but their social effects
are as well. Attention to this leverage between layers is essential because the possible
designable distribution of such positions in relation to one another may also drive the
contested governance of the Cloud and of any alternative geopolitics it might engender. Even so, for the Stack platform to work, each layer still reserves its own limits,
rules, and concreteness that is never finally reducible to the terms and jurisdictions
of another. On the one hand, the layer’s modularity within the whole means that its
effects are never exclusive or exhaustible, and on the other, the rigid simplicity of the

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

69

total platform apparatus demands that its direct functions remain encapsulated.33 Even
as any one layer’s operations unfold in relation to those of adjacent layers, and so may
also affect events that fall well outside the entire platform’s borders, the movement of
hard and soft information must always pass through the protocols that divide and bind
that layer’s work from the others.
While any one layer’s operations in a given site or moment could be captured (or
guaranteed) by state, nonstate, transstate, superstate, or substate actors, all the different layers within the arc of a specific column trade on multiple and incongruous
strategies, all or none of which may be codified by one legal jurisdictional vision (itself
perhaps unrecognized by the jurisdiction underwriting local control of another layer).
A spectrum between incongruent policing and practical interoperability nevertheless
characterizes the politics of stacks and is also itself even subject to local enforcements,
both inside and outside the column or layer that may be in dispute. In daily practice,
specific columns (hundreds of millions of them every second) are separated from one
another by their unique and particular nestings of these positions and counterpositions and by the interlocking coordination of their simultaneity, fixed or unfixed by
the force of formal state description. Because the autonomy of individual layers in the
platform resists total capture of the platform’s totality, the interslicing of aggressive
“little totalities” between columns might be rough or smooth, honed by the investments of happy Users or just as easily by the grinding tones of mutual resistance. For
any column, any strong sovereign claim (state or nonstate) can only extend over some
layers in any given moment or location, but never on the entire Stack at once. Interface
and Address may be monopolized by one jurisdictional totality in one context, and
Earth and City for another in another context, but absolute dominion over all six layers across contexts is doomed by the superimposition of multiple geographies at once,
communicating with one another without master steerage or any one final settlement
of transactions. At least in this way, The Stack is (we hope) a totality that is resistant to
totalitarianism, even as its governing coherency depends on the gravitational pull of
each layer and on the gathering of more and more of the world into its logistics (even
making the opportunity cost of transactions and transitions too cheap to measure).
In the six chapters that follow, I illustrate a provisional geopolitics of The Stack with
which we work, one layer at a time and in aggregate, and speculate about a blossoming
of exotic sovereignties that each layer might support or contain, in isolation from and
in concert with others. The tilt is not toward how a sublime coordination of Stack technologies might hasten the arrival of some full-spectrum computational end of history,
but how its gnashing juxtapositions generate peculiar new spaces, fractured enclaves,
and how its newly normalized exceptions are perhaps instructive beyond their immediate scope. As said, each individual layer spits out its own possible accidents as it abuts
its neighbors, and each is presented not only as a medium for design but as a technology for accidents.

70

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

First, the Earth layer provides a physical foundation for The Stack. This chapter
begins by considering the agency of silica as a computational substrate and how the
classical idea of a universal granularity of atomic matter has framed how we understand
the physics (and metaphysics) of computation. It argues for a foregrounding of the
geological substrate of computational hardware and of the geopolitics of mineral and
resource flows of extraction, consumption, and discarding.34 It examines arguments
regarding the ultimate energy sourcing and routing necessary for planetary computational infrastructure and the paradoxes posed by the race to build smart grids capable
of supporting its continuance and maturation. In important ways, it is possible for us
to sense, quantify, and predict ecological precariousness through Stack technologies,
and yet the production and feeding of those same systems are also key contributors to
those same risks. The chapter concludes with a discussion of the knotty problems of
ecological governance and the issues posed by turning the ecology itself into a kind of
final, ambient emergency.
The Cloud layer chapter discusses the vast server archipelagoes behind the scenes
and behind the surface that provide ubiquitous computational services as well as the
geopolitical intrigue that involves them. It includes in this the entire infrastructural
complex of server farms, massive databases, energy sources, optical cables, wireless
transmission media, and distributed applications. It focuses on the conflicts arising
from the juxtaposition and superimposition of state geography and cloud platforms
(i.e., the Google-China conflict) and on how the evolution of states into cloud platforms extends and complicates the locations of infrastructural and legal sovereignty.
The chapter also compares several existing Cloud platforms as models for alternative
Cloud polities.
The City layer of The Stack comprises the environment of discontinuous megacities
and meganetworks that situate human settlement and mobility in the combination of
physical and virtual envelopes. These partition and subdivide access to urban space,
but in their generic comprehensiveness, they may also provide for forms of accidental
cosmopolitanism, ones derived not from parliamentary certificates but from a shared
physical relationship to pervasive infrastructure. We also examine the urban-scale
imprints of major Cloud platforms and how their physical postures and positions disclose specific geopolitical imaginaries.
Now closer to the scale of familiar objects and interactions, the Address layer examines
massively granular universal addressing systems such as IPv6 (Internet Protocol version
six) (including cryptographically generated hash addresses), which would allow for a
truly abyssal volume of individual addressees. Such individuated addresses make any
thing or event appear to the Cloud as a communicable entity, and for The Stack, computation then becomes a potential property of addressed objects, places, and events,
and a medium through which any of these can directly interact with any other. While
scenarios for ubiquitous computing and an “Internet of Things” suggest information

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

71

exchange between “smart” natural objects, what I refer to as “deep address,” is interested in communication between very different spatial and temporal scales, absorbing
any addressable “haecceity” into vast, if also fragile, communicative fields that may
exceed the limits of conventional control or literacy.
The Interface layer describes the projective, perceptual cinematic, semiotic layer
on a given instrumental landscape, including the frames, subtitles, navigable maps,
pixelated hallucinations, and augmented realities through which local signification
and significance are programmed. Interfaces provide imagistic and linguistic mediation
between Users and the Addressable computational capacities of their habitats, priming
the pump for possible communication. The chapter outlines a typological history of
interfaces, from the mechanical, to the semiolinguistic, to the haptic and gestural. As
an interface, any surface or gateway oscillates between open and closed in a given context, and because of this, it is where the reversibility of the interior/exterior decision
by platforms is most clearly observed. As an interactive diagram, GUIs present a visually coherent image of otherwise discontiguous and opaque logistical flows, but when
aligned with new interface technologies, such as augmented reality that superimposes
interfacial elements directly into the perceptual field, they can collapse a metaphorical space between object and interpretation. This literal projection of the ideas and
ideologies of an imagined community onto perceived objects and events can engender
undesirable cognitive fundamentalisms.
At the top of The Stack is the most culturally complex layer, the User. This chapter
describes how The Stack sees the humans and nonhumans that initiate columns up
and down its layers, from Interface to Earth and back again, As a contemporary image
of self, the User is asked to speak through utilitarian scripts, and yet its subjectivity
is also opened up to unexpected kinds of universality. Human and nonhuman Users
are positioned by The Stack (perhaps rudely) as comparable and even interchangeable
through a wide-ranging and omnivorous quantification of their behaviors and effects.
The preponderance of data generated by Users and the traces of their worldly transactions initially overtrace the outline of a given User (e.g., the hyperindividualism of
the quantified self movement), but as new data streams overlap over it and through it,
the coherent position of the User dissolves through its overdetermination by external
relations and networks. The User’s enumeration is first a grotesquely individuated selfimage, a profile, but as the same process is oversubscribed by data that trace all the
things that affect the User, now included in the profile, the persona that first promises
coherency and closure brings an explosion and liquefaction of self.
The concluding chapter draws out from these discussions some of the most tangled and complex implications of The Stack as geopolitical design challenges to be
achieved or resisted. Among these is the proliferation of enclaves as a political and
architectural expression of network geographies. As each layer is considered in relation
to its accidents, The Stack itself is the composite accident that may define the course

72

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine

of geopolitics to come. As a global platform, its demand for universality and totality
should be read in both utopian and dystopian registers equally. The Stack may represent an epochal enclosure of the planet under an absolutist regime of algorithmic capital, or the fragility of its totality may force new breaks as its infrastructural universality
spawns new, even emancipatory programs of disenchantment, discovery, and design.
The design brief begins on the cliff’s edge of the Anthropocene, and tilts toward an
acceleration into risk and reward; it presumes that the megainfrastructures of “actually
existing” algorithmic capitalism are not, as of now, able to break clear of their own
failures and realize a break for and toward the latent potential of a postscarcity geoeconomics. That acceleration is not therefore an acceleration of The Stack or away from its
risks, but toward a particular termination and succession, and toward the articulation
and realization of a more genuinely luxurious social geology. We are resigned that the
emergence of that planetary condition, wherever and whenever, will likely not include
or require human geopolitics as we currently understand it. As such, we commit to
the ongoing design of the accidental megastructure knowing full well that its ultimate
purpose may be to disappear before it fully arrives.

II

The Layers

Earth Layer

The astronomers leave for the Southern Hemisphere, the physicists for the equator, and the
geometers leave in order to measure the earth’s meridians. The Bureau of Longitudes is created,
universal geography is founded. The world is no longer the empirical domain of time and space.
It is the compass of knowledge.
—Michel Serres, Jules Verne1
And with these, the sense of the world’s concreteness, irreducible, immediate, tangible, of something clear and closer to us: of the world, no longer as a journey, having constantly to be remade,
not as a race without end, a challenge having constantly to be met, not as the one pretext for a
despairing acquisitiveness, nor as the illusion of a conquest, but as the rediscovery of a meaning,
the perceiving that the earth is a form of writing, a geography of which we had forgotten that we
ourselves are the authors.
—Georges Perec, “The World”2
Molecules don’t have passports.
—Carl Sagan3

The foundational layer within The Stack is the Earth itself. All movement through
the lower machine layers draws on the chemistry and the physics of the Earth layer—
its energy and minerals, scale and curvature, heat and cold, and so on. There is no
planetary-scale computation without a planet, and no computational infrastructure
without the transformation of matter into energy and energy into information. But
for The Stack at least, what is computation, and how does the computational infrastructure at the Earth layer support the accidental megastructure? “Computation” is
not only what The Stack is made from; it is also how the megastructure composes,
measures, and governs itself. At the Earth layer, algorithms and electrons interweave
at landscape scale, driving continental economies; in turn, those landscapes are disciplined by other algorithms hoping to rationalize the enormous energy appetite of the
whole. We will examine this recursion from the ground up. The first sections of this

76

Earth Layer

chapter consider the materiality of computation in itself, before any artificial computing machines came onto the scene, and will ask if computation was “discovered” more
than it was invented.
The Earth layer is also made from the Earth itself, as the terraforming imperative of
the Stack megastructure disembowels geological resources toward global conversions.
These industrial processes are also as a kind of composition, one for which alternative
geoaesthetics may point toward different outcomes. We will also consider how computational infrastructures at the Earth layer extend the planet’s capacities to sense and
monitor its own energy usage by augmenting its “skin.” This is represented by grids
that can rationalize energy use, but themselves may demand fatally large amounts of
energy to construct. These contradictions contribute to uneven realignments of geopolitical jurisdiction according to the opposed positions of energy-producing geographies that most directly cause climate change and of those most affected by it. For The
Stack, the identification, quantification, management, visualization, and provision of
energy may serve as the last instance referent of economic value, and it may in time
force the evolution of a platform capable of composing and governing such a system. This in turn may put the design of the Earth layer of The Stack in the untenable
position of working on behalf of the exceptional “emergencies” that most threaten
the platform’s coherency, such that in the decades to come, the self-amplifying logics
of ecological governance demand not only geoengineering, but also incredible computational energy capture-and-distribution megastructures far beyond our current
capabilities.
16. Discovering or Inventing Computation?
For the relationship between computation and its terrestrial substrate, the Earth, it is
never easy to separate metaphor from physics, and so for my thesis, their conceptual
interrelation is perhaps just as important as their material involvements. The Earth
layer of The Stack draws from both the conceptual and the material, not by collapsing them into one so much as tracing ever-thickening lines back and forth between
them. As I imagine those lines thickening, I become immersed in a photograph of the
philosopher Gilles Deleuze, taken during a visit to Big Sur in the mid-1970s, as he sits
on the California beach examining its sands and the breathing striations of the silica
terrain.4 The world remaking itself in waves, bit by bit and pebble by pebble. In trying to
place the image, I also think about how just up the 101 freeway from where Deleuze
was sitting, silicon was being repurposed as the physical medium of synthetic computational intelligence, in the areas near Palo Alto in a “valley” already having been
named in honor of this element. For me these are conjoined, and not just by their geographic proximity: Deleuze on the beach contemplating (we might assume) what he
called “the plane of immanence,” the field from which all potential forms emerge, and

Earth Layer

77

Intel’s initial approximations of microprocessor technology for universal computation,
putting a mini-Turing machine on a silicon wafer.5 In different ways and for different
ends, both grapple with matter as vibrant, contingent, and mutable, as reproduced in
the careful calculation of sets of differences drawn from particular virtual possibilities.
At the end of the day, Deleuze’s philosophy is more about chemistry than computation, continuities more than discrete digitalizations, but his philosophical imagery of
worlds appearing from the multiplication of imminent processes and generic diagrams,
on oscillations of the physical and the virtual, is not unfamiliar to the projects of information realism. In the words of the late Friedrich Kittler, “Silicon is nature! Silicon is
nature calculating itself. If you leave out the part of engineers who write little structures
on silicon you see one part of matter calculating the rest of matter.”6
The shimmering idea that the world is composed not of given forms on a fixed
stage but of an atomic field of flux and churn is ancient. The idea precedes our ability
to mathematize the hypothesis experimentally and predates by millennia the engineering of machines that can simulate a calculation of discrete bits of information as
if they are those atoms. Close your eyes and visualize dust motes floating and falling
in the white light of a projector. See them just barely touch or miss one another. This
swirling and tumbling through the void is also, given some poetic license, one model
of elemental computation. Around 1 A.D., Lucretius called these atomic bits primordia
or seminarerum, and for the Epicurean philosophical tradition, this flux is ontological
and the basis of their own information theory avant la lettre.7 It says that what seems
to be naive observation as solid figures and grounds, withdrawn into themselves and
oriented as objects, are but clusters of bits that have fallen into one another over time,
and will in more time fall apart and again into other things, conjugating or calculating
themselves again and again. The name for the force of collision that causes their downward arcs to tumble into assemblage is translated from the Latin as swerve. Atomic bits
swerve, as if by accident, and in their accumulation, the entropy of the noisy void gives
way to the negentropic formulation of the world and its temporal orderliness: from
this calculation, forms form. Lucretius called this economy of entanglement between
atoms, located by their fluid communication in flight, the clinamen, and it has been the
source of considerable philosophical and literary rumination (including Marx’s doctoral dissertation).
Today, enjoying a vantage point that includes contemporary atomic physics, we see
the clinamen less as a spontaneous lurch of some thing from its track (the universe
as the eventual archive of these accumulated deviations) than as interlocking fields
of stochastic probabilities structuring emergent order in this way or that. The details
evolve, but the idea of calculative emergence persists. The basic innovations are well
known. In twelfth century Majorca, Ramon Llull described logical machines, influencing Gottfried Leibniz, who developed a predictive calculus and a biliteral alphabet that, drawing on the I Ching, allowed for the formal reduction of any complex

78

Earth Layer

symbolic expression to a sequence of discrete binary states (zero and one, on and off).
Later, the formalization of logic within the philosophy mathematics (from PierreSimon Laplace, to Gottlob Frege, Georg Cantor, David Hilbert, and so many others)
helped to introduce, inform, and ultimately disprove a version of the Enlightenment
as the expression of universal deterministic processes (of both thought and physics).
In 1936, with his now-famous paper, “On Computable Numbers, with an Application
to the Entscheidungsproblem,” a very young Alan Turing at once introduced the theoretical basis of modern computing and demonstrated the limits of what could and
could not ever be calculated and computed by a universal technology. Turing envisioned his famous “machine” according to the tools of his time to involve an infinite
amount of “tape” divided into cells that can store symbols, moved along a stationary
read-write “head” that can alter those symbols, a “state register” that can map the current arrangement of symbols along the tape, and a “table” of instructions that tells the
machine to rewrite or erase the symbol and to move the “head,” assuming a new state
for the “register” to map. The Church-Turing thesis (developed through the 1940s
and 1950s) would demonstrate that Turing’s “machine” not only could simulate algorithms, but that a universal Turing machine, containing all possible such machines,
could, in theory, calculate all logical problems that are in fact computable (a limit
that Turing’s paper sought to identify). The philosophical implications are thorny
and paradoxical. At the same moment that Turing demonstrates the mechanical basis
for synthetic logic by machines (suggesting real artificial intelligence), he partially
delinks the correlation between philosophical thought and machinic calculation. The
implications continue to play out in contemporary debates from robotics to neuroscience to the philosophy of physics, as has Turing’s later conceptualization of “thinking machines,” verified by their ability to convincingly simulate the performance of
human-to-human interaction, the so-called Turing test.8 In the decades since Turing’s
logic machine, computation-in-theory became computers-in-practice, and the digitalization of formal systems into mechanical systems and then back again, has become a
predominant economic imperative. Through several interlocking modernities, the calculation of discrete states of flux and form would become more than a way to describe
matter and change in the abstract, but also a set of standard techniques to strategically
refashion them as well. Computability moves from a universal logic to a generic technology (and so contemporary claims that this passage is reversible are both predictable and problematic). Although the twentieth century invented computers, it did not
invent computation so much as it discovered it as a general force, and offered some
initial basic tools to work with it more directly. We are, like everything else, also its
product.
This conceptual shift is important to how we hope to consider reforming The Stack.
One of Turing’s signal achievements is to show that an artificial “machine” could
approach, and even approximate, the scope of natural computation, as defined in a

Earth Layer

79

particular way. His innovation was the specific pairing of formal logic with industrial
technology that was, even after Charles Babbage and Ada Lovelace’s Victorian-era calculating machines, by no means obvious in its implications. For measuring the significance of that pairing in relation to The Stack, it is important to distinguish the limits
of formal computation, on the one hand, from what the limits of actual computational
technologies can really do, on the other. These are two very different kinds of limits.
While Turing’s hypothetical machine demonstrated the mathematical limits of formal computability, it also demonstrated that any problems that could be captured and
expressed symbolically through a reduction to rational integers (which likely describes
the vast plurality of things and events in the world as representable by intelligent creatures) could be simulated and solved by a machine engineered to do so, given enough
time, materials, and energy. Anything expressed as computable information, regardless
of the natural appearance, linguistic identity, or economic value, could be processed
by a universal information machine programmed to do so and physically capable of
running through enough operations. A strong computationalist philosophical position
may also extrapolate from this that natural systems can be (and so must be) reducible
to information and computational processes.9 Problems arise when the notion that
things are formally equivalent by their shared computability slides into the claim that
they are therefore ontologically equivalent, or even culturally and economically equivalent. The questions raised by the idea of universally calculable matter are interesting
on both practical and philosophical terms, but I raise them here to provide conceptual
context for other questions.
At the time of this book’s publication, no one (certainly not I) can pronounce on the
practical validity of quantum computing or industrial-scale atomic-level design, and
so for that reason alone, we are careful to separate computation from computers, and
not to confuse the mathematical genericity of computation as a process with the actual
and comparatively feeble algorithm-crunching machines at work now and in the near
future.10 Surely the latter is a sad cartoon of the former, and Turing’s model of a universal computing machine specifies a break between what mathematics could describe
as the computation of natural information and what artificial computing technology
could ever program or perform. Even supercomputing grids are just machines particularly efficient at calculation tasks at predictable speeds, but they are not in themselves
“computation,” just as light bulbs are machines good at conducting electrical currents toward illumination but are not in themselves electricity or light. Many things
process information algorithmically and could be said to “compute” in a meaningful
sense (DNA and RNA, for example) without also demanding that we must see in them
the reflection of our computing machines.11 We might even assume that the “next
machines” (the ones that come after planetary-scale computation) will look less like
today’s computers and more like biology itself.12 Turing described a capacity to mimic
natural computation, providing a measurement of the gap between it and artificial

80

Earth Layer

machinic computation, but as we learn to design by the comingling of bits and atoms
into strange hybrids, we may in time need to retake that measurement.13 Even if so,
we will still resist the conflation of the quasi-universality of theoretical computation
with the scope of real or near-future computational infrastructure, not to mention
the indeterminate geopolitical effects of that infrastructure on those effects. Unfortunately, both utopian and dystopian alliances are happy to underwrite and expand that
conflation to support their own deterministic narratives, but for The Stack, we won’t.
One hopes that instead of dressing up contemporary techniques as ontological principles, an emphasis on the discovery (versus invention) of computation should make
the practical distinction between the formal and the functional more apparent. The
geopolitical effects of accidental computational megastructures remain design problems precisely because they are not determined by inflated notions about immanent
(and imminent) logics.
Anything else risks misleading conclusions drawn from deceptively conditional
extrapolations from the present. For some, logarithmic arcs like Moore’s law suggest
exponentially accelerating change in the most general sense and lead them to posit
a big computer in the night sky, or a quasi-theological master operating system, and
to identify computation as some vital force pulsing through all media.14 From there, a
future horizon filled with formal convergence, magic, and rapture looks inevitable. For
some, that is the best possible news and for others the worst, but they can agree on the
basic outline of a script that is too simplistic. At the same time, perhaps this genre of
extrapolative futurism is just another way of saying that mathematics is universal and
algorithmic technologies are medium independent, and so we need to employ them
differently than we do now (which is true). Or, perhaps, is it but an elegant humming
along with the most superficial and poorly theorized aspects of digital capitalism as
it dissolves raw materials into interchangeable goods and services, and so the melody
is rewarded for flattering the illusion that these linear speculations represent timeless
principles? Industrial capitalism had social Darwinism, and today do we have instead
a social Turingism: financialization as social metaphysics? Perhaps it is both (and more
besides). Like Freud’s figural model of the mind in the rough image of the thermodynamic industrial engine,15 the paradigmatic idea that the ongoing reassemblage of
the world is, in some literal sense, given to computational processes is more than just
ideological metaphor run amok.16 It is more than partially true because we have made it
true. The long-term technical question is to what extent we can describe and practically
manipulate material systems by algorithmic calculation—flipping bits on and off, like
the motes present or absent at any given point in the light, and gathering them into the
forms we recognize as the world—and to what extent not at all, and more important,
when we can and cannot do so, and toward what outcomes they should be directed.
As is well known, hyperfast algorithmic asset trades flourish in global equities and
futures markets and account for huge percentages of all executed trades; their swerves

Earth Layer

81

also form value but do so in ways that can exceed or outpace human oversight. Algorithmic capitalism’s own story is often too happy to confuse means and ends, but perhaps counterintuitively, we may conclude nevertheless that the synthetic inhumanity
of computational capital is actually the most direct vector out of the anthropocentric
humanism that places short-term human needs at the center of public philosophy
and engineering. The limits of machinic calculation are not the same as the limits of
deterministic rationality, and the social effects of computational systems are certainly
given to creative accidents.17 Reactionary analog aesthetics and patriotisms, Emersonian withdrawal, and deconstrucivist political theology buy us less time and far less
wiggle room than they promise, even less actually than the unfortunate notion that
planetary-scale computation could emerge and mature without fundamental constitutive violence against traditional (that is, “modern”) concepts of individual, society,
and sovereignty. Because they simulate logic but are not themselves necessarily logical,
computers make the world in ways that do not ultimately require our thinking to function (such as the interactions between high-speed trading algorithms that even their
programmers cannot entirely predict and comprehend). The forms of inhuman intelligence that they manifest will never pass the Turing test, nor should we bother asking
this of them. It is an absurd and primitive request.18 It is inevitable that synthetic algorithmic intelligences can and will create things that we have not thought of in advance
or ever intended to make, but as suggested, because they do not need our thinking or
intention as their alibi, it is their inhumanity that may make them most creative.19
Like Deleuze on the beach making sand piles, humans wrangle computation with our
algorithm boxes, and in doing so, we make things by accident, sometimes little things
like signal noise on the wire and sometimes big things like megastructures.
17. Digestion
In the dynamic between natural computation expressing itself through artificial computing machines and those machines in turn remaking the world, each bends and
countersimulates itself awkwardly and incompletely in the other. The Earth layer is
shaped by this irregular and perhaps unsustainable interplay between the one and the
other—sensing, drawing, enumerating, consuming, effecting. While it is a mistake
to imagine computation as something that just sprang into existence with the rise
of computing machines, or as the superimposition of some synthetic layer on top of
everything organic and analogous and ultimately separate from natural algorithmic
processes, it is also wrong to imagine computation as existing on a dry virtual plane
sealed off from wet economies of energy, water, arbitrary valuation, remote capture, and
geographic chance. So irrespective of the mathematical limits of algorithmic reason,
The Stack is interested instead in the limited and sufficient compositional capacities
of a megastructure already under construction, the thresholds of which are geological,

82

Earth Layer

sociological, economic, chemical, and geopolitical as much as they are calculative. This
chapter draws on those limits and on the risks that come with positioning the Earth as
a layer in a synthetic machine, and for this Earth is the Earth—a physical planet—not
a metaphor for “nature.” There is no planetary-scale computation, now a vast network
of many billions of little Turing machines, that does not intake and absorb the Earth’s
chemistry in order to function. The Stack is a hungry machine, and while its curated
population of algorithms may be all but massless, their processing of Earthly material
is a physical event, and therefore the range of possible translations between information and mechanical appetites has another limit that is not mathematical but defined
by the real finitude of substances that can force communication between both sides
of this encounter.20 Furthermore, like any megamachine the Earth layer is as socially
constrained as it is technologically configured, and so there are political economies of
Turing machines that are only accessible through misaligned and uneven hierarchies
of geography, energy, and programmability.21
This is made clear by unpacking and sifting through the hardware on which The
Stack depends. Silicon is far from the only important substance required in its manufacturing and maintenance, and the economics of its assembly are far from crystalline.
The Stack’s need for more exotic elements is intense, and even relatively mundane
consumer electronics and Cloud tethers (aka “phones”) contain dozens of different
minerals and metals sourced from every continent. Some crucial metals are drawn
largely from rich and vulnerable mines in central Africa. In the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), for example, big chunks and little pebbles of tantalum
(coltan), cassiterite (tin), wolframite (tungsten), and gold are pulled by hand from cold,
sludgy mountain rivers, often by children, and eventually they make their way into the
device component supply chain.22 In 2009 a few mines here produced 13 percent of
the world’s mined coltan, an inert metal used in ubiquitous tiny capacitors, especially
for cell phones.23 From this same land, the Belgians took ivory, the Americans cobalt,
and now billions of Earthlings everywhere carry little bits of Africa around with them in their
pockets. The financial rewards of mining and trading in electronics have contributed to
devastating effects in the region, including overlapping civil wars in the DRC and next
door in Rwanda (from 1998 to 2003, upward of 5 million people died in the Congolese
civil war, making it by one measure the deadliest conflict since World War II).24 Extraction and export of minerals, both legal and illegal, have been controlled and taxed by
competing militias and organized crime; away from the relative stability of the cities,
these groups continue to terrorize local populations and use the proceeds of this export
trade to finance ongoing wars over local territorial positions. The smoldering conflict is
a war partially financed with the manufacturing capital of smart phones and laptops;
inevitably, the smooth skin of the device demands gore to feed its gloss. Deforestation
in the pursuit of new sources of coltan in remote areas populated by gorillas has also led
to an increase in the trade and consumption of bush meat, a quasi-cannibal economy

Earth Layer

83

that may also allegorize widespread war crimes in nearby villages. Exported minerals are sent to smelting companies, mostly in China, India, Thailand, and Malaysia,
where they are mixed with metals sourced the world over (Australia and Brazil are the
other major sources of coltan). More recently, the “conflict minerals” cause has taken
its place among other Konyisms, but potentially effective legislation has been passed,
including in the United States, that requires electronics manufactures to better police
their own supply chains.25
The most heinous circumstances are the most allegorically rich, but even absent the
anarchic brutality of these wars and the Conradian odor of campaigns against them,
the lesson is more global: there is no Stack without a vast immolation and involution of
the Earth’s mineral cavities. The Stack terraforms the host planet by drinking and vomiting
its elemental juices and spitting up mobile phones. After its short career as a little computing brick within a larger megamachine, its fate at the dying end of the electronics component life cycle is just as sad. What is called “electronic waste” inverts the process that
pulls entropic reserves of metal and oil from the ground and given form, and instead
partially disassembles them and reburies them, sometimes a continent away and sometimes right next door. Minerals originally sourced from the Congo might make their
way to California via China, before being pulled by hand from a dead phone and
burned or buried in Agbogbloshie, Ghana, or Lagos, Nigeria, two of the most active
repositories, a short distance from their source.26
18. Geo-graphy and Geoaesthetics
As a transcontinental effect, this digestive cycle can also be seen as a sort of distributed
composition, a discontiguous plastic-metallic mega-assemblage remade every day with
little molecular bits floating in the light, across the ocean and our lives. To call these
flows “compositions” is not to excuse their due ethical weight, but instead to remind
ourselves that they are recomposable, and as such, that any sense of inevitability about
how they are now arranged today is shortsighted. How unfamiliar could its flux and
churn be from what it is now? At the radical end of that contingency, what is the ultimate recomposability of such materials? The answer may depend on how well we can
collaborate with synthetic algorithmic intelligence to model the world differently—in
other words, thinking takes place in relation to territory, and concepts not only represent the world but also make it according to their situation: diagramming, deforming,
drawing and redrawing, and segmenting of the Earth back on itself. We internalize
ideas from ground and sky according to whatever perspectives are available (Copernicus, Solaris, Hubble) until like the upside-down spacewalking astronauts, we are dislodged from this reference and given back to the void.
The Stack is not only on the Earth and built out of the Earth; as a composition, it
is also a framing of the Earth, and so its geodesign works through its specific sorts of

84

Earth Layer

line-making and putting segments of the world in motion. Elizabeth Grosz develops a
philosophical trope of demarcation as an elemental principle of animal world-making.
She writes, “The earth can be infinitely divided, territorialized, framed. … Framing is
how chaos becomes territory. Framing is the means by which objects are delimited,
qualities unleashed and art is made possible.”27 Making enclosure by drawing a segment of the world into a presentation is elementary place-making; it is the gesture
of geography. Schmitt would not disagree up to this point. The frame, however, is a
peculiar sort of introduction of difference whereby the surface of things appears to fold
in on itself. It captures and exhibits its subject curled back on itself by a delineation of
figure and ground. Grosz links the act of framing, however, not to the subtractive competition of natural selection but to the multiplicative energy of sexual selection and
its economies of display, expenditure, and abundance. In her Darwinian parable, the
animal draws territory with its paw, its wing, or song refrain not only to fend off predators but also to stage itself in the view of a mate. She quotes from Deleuze and Félix
Guattari’s last collaboration: “Every morning the Scenopoetes dentirostris, a bird of the
Australian rain forests, cuts leaves, makes them fall to the ground, and turns them over
so that the paler internal side contrasts with the earth. In this way it constructs a stage
for itself like a ready-made; and directly above, on a creeper or branch, while fluffing its
feathers beneath its beak to reveal their yellow roots, it sings a complex song made up
from its own notes and, at intervals, those of other birds that it imitates; it is a complete
artist.” Beyond what is needed for survival in the moment, this act of self-framing sets
the world in motion with a composition that motivates communion. The composability of the Earth is “not linked to some intrinsic relation to one’s own body but exactly
the opposite: it is linked to those processes of distancing and the production of a plane
of composition that abstracts sensation from the body.” Grosz writes that the frame
“is the particular contribution of architecture to the taming of the virtual, the territorialization of the uncontrollable forces of the Earth. It is the frame that ... liberates the
qualities of objects or event that come to constitute the substance, the matter.”
Framing lines, separate or conjoined, subdivide the ground or link points together.
A plurality of lines, both dividing and linking at once, might fold on itself in various
ways and in these overlaps create irregular twisty grids, populated by air pockets of
various sizes and identity, inside or outside, enclaves and exclaves. Lines are agents of
geopolitical form and their various types (e.g., lines of flight, lines of intensification,
lines of transformation and subdivision) curve into the frames that present geopolitics
to itself: the border, fenestration, aperture, plan, section, elevation, orifice, capital city,
special economic zone, demilitarized zone.28 When the nomic line that partitions polities from one another is looped, it too becomes a frame, and as a form of geopolitical
design, these arrange and present political geography. For contemporary governance,
the simultaneous unwinding and reinforcement of modern jurisdiction, and its fragile
pairing of geography and law in mutually validating representational systems, hopes

Earth Layer

85

to organize the world according to certain framings, and it defends its drawings with
force. As a nomic technique, these generate and enforce jurisdictional conventions and
exclude alternatives.29 For example, however inspired or misguided the Mountbatten
Plan may have been, the partition of India was a design decision, and the image and map
of the region that would result was constituent of a specific design imaginary.30 Scaling
from one line to a whole system, the looping segmentations of the Westphalian model
are bolstered into a geopolitical architecture, as are the sectional planes of our more
vertical Stack. This compositional geopolitics has its own history filled with frames and
topographies projected variously into the past and future as much as onto real living
territory. Especially at the Interface layer, we will see that the violence of presentation
and preemptive representation—projection as territory and territory as projection—is the
engine of any Stack geopolitics, inherited or invented, at work now or to come later.
Again, authority and its authorship can speak only to what it can see and sense, and
in turn what it can measure, and so geopolitics and geoscopy are always bound up
with one another.31 The Stack works within given geographic limits and draws new
geographies with those limits. While landscapes have direct physical agency (that is,
“geography,” as in “Montesquieu credits the rise of the West to geographical advantage,
such as not having to govern wide flat expanses such as the Great Steppe”),32 we are as
interested in another connotation, per Grosz, one more like geo-graphy, as in “earthwriting” or “earth-drawing.” Specifically this geo-graphy is both a kind of writing of
space and of expressing, communicating, politicizing compositional images of terrain
as a precondition of the social and technical construction of spaces to be defended. For
there to be any kind of abstract jurisdiction—secular, sacred, national, networked—
there has to be a figure of space through which force can work at all. Schmitt’s concept
of the nomos is one establishment of this, but geography more generally frames the referent over which any governing, compositional, projective frame seeks authority, and
here Grosz’s animalian frame becomes a basis of geopolitical constitution. Geography,
in this sense, is a specific kind of relationship between world and image, in that it is
itself both an image of the world and a real rendering of physical landscape according
to that representation. Its force and coherence are based in both the abstract image and
the physical world as they refer to one another, and in the course of real politics, by
their mutual conjoining into one defensible inscription.33
This process demonstrates that geography, geoscopy, and geopolitics are also related
to the more ambitious and ambiguous operations of geoaesthetics. The composability
of the Earth, as both figure and ground, mark and canvas, long precedes the global
geometries of The Stack, but the latter inevitably still draws on many varied precedent
gestures. Scores of ancient geoglyphs dot landscapes on all continents, carved into
the skin of the planet or assembled with rocks put in lines for the viewing benefit of
aerial audiences: deities, birds, skies, and whatever else might be observing from the
top of the world. Landscape is given a face.34 The advent and eventual predominance

86

Earth Layer

of formal agriculture permanently refixed that face’s expression, helped to geoengineer the Holocene climate, and with this terraforming also brought the archaic state
and urban settlement. If viewed from the sky by the geoglyphs’ audiences, agricultural
megastriations might allow for a legible index of the accumulating distribution of different genres of biogovernance as distributed across the sphere; that is, different typologies of political form can be interpreted by differences in their physical landscapes
viewed as geo-graphic drawings. In dialogue with the new externalized perspectives of
the space age, this was not lost on art and design, and the very early years of planetary
computation and global media (approximately 1964 to 1975) saw an explosion of land
art, earthworks, and speculative megastructural architecture. For example, the Italian
studios Archizoom and Superstudio made some of the most durable megastructural
gestures from inside architectural discourse, while the American artist Robert Smithson left a body of work linking geoglyphic-scale sculpture with generative cinema35
and cartographic semiotics with anarchist geography (his “mapping dislocations”).36 In
these works, we see visual inscriptions into landscapes and images of those inscriptions
blending into the same pottery, such that real drawing into the ground and the image
of the drawing can swap places; the land becomes an image and the image becomes
territorial, both of them equally infrastructural. This conduction between the two is
by no means exclusive to institutional art and design and belongs to computation just
as dearly. In 1968 Apollo 8 astronaut William Anders took the famous “Earthrise” photograph, which would become among the most iconic and influential portraits of the
whole planet Earth, and as for any island utopia, the totality of the singular figure of
the Earth against a black abyss, here seen from specific external position on the moon,
would invite projects of total design.37 This image map from the “outside” reframed the
very figurability of territorial ground as such and suggested a single, absolute scale for
Earthly culture and ecology and a single planetary “inside.”38 That figure inspired as
well the popular ecology movement by providing it a self-evident domain to conserve,
commune, or administer.
Today, that same apparently same self-evident image of totality also serves as a
graphical user interface to personal mapping applications that are based on satellite
observations of all locations within the image-territory. Google Earth, for example, is
a meta-interface into an archaeological view of the virtual frozen present of a planet
comprehensively available to vision, but also largely devoid of animal bodies. It frames
an Earth mostly deserted by humans who have left behind empty cities. For Google
Earth, both the image and the interface promise an absolute frame; a metaframe of
frames and their collaborative geopolitical ambition is derived from that promise. By
zooming in and out across relative scales, the global image becomes a total site condition, one for which infrastructure-as-monument is apparently the most appropriate
measure of intervention at any given resolution.39 However, the territorial politics of
Google, as discussed in the Cloud chapter, resides less in what is seen than what is not

Earth Layer

87

seen, and in how the not-seen allows the seen to override other jurisdictional inscriptions and partitions.
19. From Global Surface to Planetary Skin
The Stack’s visual geography amplifies economies of mutual simulation between land,
image, and interface by redefining the surface of the Earth as a living and governable epidermis, and recomposing that skin as a bio-informational matrix enrolled into
other hard and soft systems. As a landscaping machine, The Stack combs and twists
settled areas into freshly churned ground, enumerating input and output points and
rerendering them as glassy planes of pure logistics. It wraps the globe in wires, making it into a knotty, incomplete ball of glass and copper twine, and also activates the
electromagnetic spectrum overhead as another drawing medium, making it visible
and interactive, limning the sky with colorful blinking aeroglyphs.40 The Stack walls
off whole layers of that spectrum for private purposes by optimizing it through finer
and finer atmospheric grids, turning location into geolocation and geolocation into
application engineering. Its image of infrastructure and the infrastructure of the image
flip-flop their respective works, repositioning geoscopy as geoaesthetics and geoaesthetics as geoeconomics. For example, the Earth layer also situates a network of telescopes “looking out” into space from many positions at once, so as create a composite
“false” image of a portion of the universe. This technique, known as very long baseline
interferometry (VLBI), creates a single discontiguous machine distributed among many
countries, useful only if it is operated across multiple time zones at once. As a Stack
geographic machine, Google Earth can be thought of as an inverse of VLBI, in that it
looks inward instead of outward to create a composite “false” image of the distributed
surface of the Earth by integrating the perspectives of multiple orbital satellite perspectives into one (interactive) visual totality. Standing for a global domain drawn in place,
this mosaic draws Earth’s skin as an island to be measured and mastered. As it builds on
the Apollo 8 image of figure and void, Google Earth amplifies it into a general-purpose
application interface through which the User layer and Earth layer of The Stack seem to
inform one another directly.41 Here the geoaesthetics of Stack geo-graphy displays ecology as an archive to be indexed, cataloged, and sorted, and only then acted on (and
as discussed in the Interface chapter, that archive is also made into an interface toward
itself, provoking User-initiated feedback loops between icons and events).
Such Stack geographies both complicate and clarify the design of platform sovereignty, as much for what they make possible as for what they disrupt. Google’s mission
statement, “to organize the world’s information and to make it universally accessible and useful,” changes meaning when the world itself is seen as being information,
such that to organize all the information is to organize all the world. Furthermore,
synthetic computation expands what is sensed, measured, calculated, communicated,

88

Earth Layer

stored, and worked on. That is, the ascendance of digital computing from a narrowly
deployed, elite scientific-military instrument into a general-purpose planetary-scale
consumer infrastructure shifting what states (and other systems of governance) can see,
know, and affect, transforms it into an organ of organizational cognition. As sensing
extends to all specific surfaces, no longer dumb but rather now affective, the net sum of
spaces opened up or closed off by computation largely defines what it is that any governance platform now chooses to sense and not to sense in general. The information
that is sensible to it is more often that not on the surfaces of the territory, intensifying
governmental focus on them. Skin, after all, is the largest sensory organ of any animal
body, composed of multiple dermal and epidermal layers holding organs together and
mediating multiple layers of individual interiority and exteriority (the governance of
skin will also figure prominently in the City chapter—in that case, urban skins and
envelopes).42
The extrapolation of planetary surfaces as epidermis has been inextricably linked
with the conceptualization of climatic measurement and prediction. Global climate
and weather systems have long been a driving application for planetary instrumentation and the understanding of the globe as a “vast machine.”43 The interdependence
between the image of infrastructure and the infrastructure of the interfacial image is
exemplified as the systems logic of a geographic, bio-informational, planetary-scale
epidermal sensing and computation megastructure by—who else?—the Planetary Skin
Institute. For this project, the living and breathing geoepidermis is surveyed through
a proposed meta-instrumentation of the biosphere into a totally available archived
present, open to interested intervention, collaborative management, and quantified
governance. Originally launched cooperatively in 2009 by the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) and Cisco Systems, and now an independent nonprofit research and development platform, Planetary Skin sought to integrate data
from many sources into a single, branded geoadministrative mechanism. An internal
Cisco white paper describes Planetary Skin as “an open network platform for real-time,
highly distributed mass remote sensing, authentication, risk-profiling, certification
and monitoring of carbon stocks and flows that generates trust and enables collaboration between actors in all three sectors (industry, government, academia).” Its ultimate ambition is to provide an open and comprehensive multiconstituent platform
for monitoring and governing planetary biological-ecological systems, with particular
emphasis on water distribution and carbon quantification (ultimately to support pricing of these reserve currencies, we imagine). One early pilot project, Rainforest Skin,
would measure the total quantity of carbon contained within the planet’s rain forests,
perhaps the most immediately leverageable carbon governance opportunity and where
carbon dioxide sinks are concentrated but threatened by land misuse. The project
would combine data sets drawn from “geo-referenced satellites, unmanned aerial vehicles and multiple ground based sensor networks to estimate the forest’s carbon stock

Earth Layer

89

and flow dynamics, so as to allow for trading and risk management of this new commodity.”44 Stack-scale initiatives such as Planetary Skin (and there are many others)
certainly qualify as frames in Grosz’s sense, as they frame the totality of Earth at once
so as to identify and track strategic chemical subroutines, such as carbon flows, and to
present these totalities back to the whole. This sort of speculative megacomputation is
but one way that geoscopy, geography, and geopolitics blur and blend into amalgamated images, territories, and governmental techniques and is but one way that The
Stack composes the Earth layer.
The Planetary Skin Institute’s tagline, “You can’t monitor what you can’t measure,”
is a good motto for the big data society, should it ever be clarified at some point in the
process who is and isn’t “you.” As Planetary Skin describes its plans, “you” are likely
drawn from among the usual stakeholders of technocrats, academics, nongovernmental organizations, consultants, and so on.45 The likely effect of this initiative, however,
were it or something like it ever fully realized, would not merely extend or consolidate
the arrangement of zero-sum governance as we currently know it, but would inevitably introduce other compound subjects and objects, some human and some not, and
elevate them from object to subject in uncertain ways. A benefit of these initiatives
would not only be the quantification of a status quo, but ultimately to break ground
for alternative norms and constitute (or at least support) another medium of governance
over the biosystems that it (“we”) can measure and monitor. “Planetary Skin,” or some
similar descendant platform might connect with existing governmental and nongovernmental biopolitical authorities, supporting, augmenting, superseding them and,
through ecumenical platform interoperability, would ultimately become itself a governing authority. Through neutral simulation-visualization of ground-level patterns on
which any large-scale carbon trading markets would depend, a platform like this could
quantify the carbon stocks that might be traded or sequestered, as well as validate
treaty verifications or violations. This would help turn matter into money by providing
a kind of financial transparency—in this case, of financialized molecules. Like many
other platform projects emblematic of the Stack’s incorporation of the Earth as a layer,
it would convene political authority not by starting from scratch, but by remeasuring,
reframing, and reinstrumentalizing some already existing geographic whole. They generate comprehensive quantifications of processes and patterns that, to the extent that
they operate as intended, also take on the effective force of law within an expanded
ecopolitical jurisdiction even if their claims are not ratified by states (Westphalian
or post-Westphalian) to do so. Furthermore, as these metatechnologies of ecological
observation have become necessary to even perceive the contours of ecological risk,
they also enter directly into the programmatic center of planetary governance as such.
This is not Internationalism, however. The force of platforms is different, for example,
from the “ecoglobalism” feared by conspiratorial isolationists, all spittle-lipped over
“Agenda 21” (the conspiracy theory that has the United Nations introducing Green

90

Earth Layer

totalitarianism through the Trojan horse of bicycle lanes) in that there is, according to
design at least, no central commanding body outside the architecture of the platform
itself.46 Such platforms, in principle, may even work, for better or worse, to undermine
forms of political centralization, even those that they themselves do not or cannot calculate or articulate. That said, nothing is certain. A transference of sovereignty from the
declared self-interest of whoever counts as a citizen into the calculation of carbon and
energy also links one inhale and another exhale, even across continents, and in doing
so guarantees at the very least indecipherable accounting paradoxes.
Computation is training governance to see the world as it does and to be blind like
it is. If, over time, something sees for the state, on behalf of the state and in place of
the state, it does so by seeing as a state, or by seeing as something the state has not
yet become but would become once it’s trained by these same new tools of perception and blindness. As the state involves new techniques into itself, those techniques
also absorb, displace, and diminish the state by controlling access to unique jurisdictions that the state cannot otherwise possibly comprehend without their help. While
it extends jurisdictionality, The Stack also confiscates and multiplies it. It doesn’t
merely accelerate or open up governance as currently configured; it invents substitutions as alternate jurisdictions appear, linking cellular biology to computational geopolitics, some enduring for seconds, others perhaps for many centuries. Macroscopic
platforms such as Planetary Skin frame Earth as a competitive archive sorted into
a quantifiable past, an atemporal surficial now, and predictive virtualizations of its
futures from which models and simulations, its preferred instruments of governance,
can be derived. Through these, opacity and privacy are redefined by a spectacle of
transparency, as the platform’s authority is based on the quantity and quality of its
data and from the means to translate that stash into simulations of error-corrected
pasts, presents, and futures. From Cisco, NASA, Google, and others, data are available for free or on a subscription basis and provided with an invitation to innovate
vertical markets with their tools, because geoepidermal megastructures such as these
realize their political value through the immediate and potential events they can
sense and their economic value through the currencies they can verify for their Users,
and so they are themselves dependent on enabling Users to actively engage platform
interfaces and to act back on the materials they represent. Platforms are machines as
well as maps (an “engine, not a camera”).47 They are media with which to compose
things not just to measure them, and so the slogan “You can’t monitor what you
can’t measure” may need to be revised to include the Foucauldian line, “You can’t
modify what you can’t monitor,” or even, “You can’t not modify whatever it is that
you sense.”
Today this and other geoscopic situations are provided to us by Stack infrastructures of orbiting satellites—artificial constellations—connected to terrestrial networks.
Instrumenting the planet in this way has not only allowed for a more finely grained

Earth Layer

91

geography; it has also physically altered the very scale of the Earth’s gradient body,
altering what it measures as the Holocene atmospheric membrane has been augmented
by a crust of smart satellites and dumb garbage. The planet’s natural equatorial diameter is roughly 12,756 kilometers, and if one were to include the celestial atmospheric
firmament, that would be nearer to 13,000 kilometers. However the ring of communications technologies, in geosynchronous orbit every twenty-four hours, linking points
on Earth’s surface to one another and self-locating the whole sphere in its lonely void,
forms another outer membrane extending the measurement to 36,000 kilometers. Are
they not also part of Earth’s body? As a whole, satellite observation technology has
vastly inflated the physical geometrics of the observed planet, but it has compressed
the conceptual spaces of relative distance as well. As surely as The Stack generates new
spaces, does it also ensure a certain erasure of other worlds? This is, as noted, a common
refrain for critiques of modernity, from both Right and Left, and Virilio has written
scores of texts providing a negative apologetics of globalization and the subsumption
of the continuity of the Earth into the omnivorous universalisms of cyberinfrastructure. For his eschatology, the “world” is a tragic casualty of its appearance in digital
images of itself.48 It cannot survive this manner of testimony. It is shrunken, eaten,
defamed by its reduction to a plateau of digitalized time. Whereas difference and analogy are naturally functions of distance, in the instantaneousness of global information
the landscape of distances has collapsed, and so for Virilio digital space is dark matter,
one that instead of expanding and elongating real distances instead flattens the space
of analogy into the simultaneity of network time. There are other, and better, judgments of these accelerations, displacements, elongations, migrations, vectors, lines,
and links. Can they be drawn without replicating the terms of reduction that any truly
living image would need to escape? Is this what is most starkly absent from Google
Earth’s transformation of the map into the Interface? In that the diagrams and visualizations of the networked totality are also, to varying degrees, cosmograms (figures of the
whole of the universe and Earthly situation), what intrinsic violence does the speed of
interactivity do to the depth or depthlessness of the global space that it models? What
can we do with these pictures of the data that the world secretes, and what do they want
from us ultimately? These questions are themselves some of the productive accidents
of the Earth layer of The Stack.
The technologies we use to measure and monitor the Earth have increased the objective scale of the planet and have shown us real pictures of the cosmic abyss that might
(should) crack open our little primate skulls, but in doing so have also collapsed the
phenomenal scale of our sense of habitat. In its paired world-making and world-erasure
projects, the Earth layer of The Stack will have introduced equal measures of numinous
insight and atonal banality.49 Our argument, however, is that like the turn away from
geocentrism and toward heliocentrism (still very much an incomplete turn for the
superstitious norms of humanist geopolitics), the platformization of the Earth layer

92

Earth Layer

will, in net sum, provide for greater “worlds” than it erases. That said, the design program ahead is full of twists and turns.
20. Smart Grid: Ouroboros
As biological economies are dependent on energy economies, so biopolitics is dependent on the polities of energy.50 Projects like Planetary Skin attempt to ensure one
sort of compatibility between energy and biology by modeling their computational
equivalence. Not only is carbon priced according to its negative costs, but the chemistry of life-forms that absorb carbon dioxide and ameliorate those costs is quantified
and qualified as a valuable “service.” Rainforests, mangroves, and sea grasses eat the
gaseous excrement of industrialization, and for this they and their legal custodians are
perhaps due rent. Geophysics itself is thus made into a form of material labor, and its
surpluses are enumerated, invested, exchanged, collateralized. But the Earth layer is not
only where energy is monitored; it also the source and provisioner of the brute energy
to run the other layers of The Stack; it is the bedrock stratum where energy economies
produce the networkable electrons necessary to animate the machines above, fabricated in steel, cement, plastic, silicon, and flesh. Regardless of its source (solar, nuclear,
compressed natural gas, wind, hydrothermal, coal) or the network architecture of its
industrial generation and distribution (from massively centralized, like a nuclear fission power plant, to informal and decentralized, like an off-the-grid solar panel cluster), energy dictates the variability of human settlements and their ultimate risks, costs,
and benefits. Our design interest therefore is not aligned with a notional sustainability
conceived as conservative homeostasis, but with the force routes of a disequilibrium
that reverberate through matter and transform the world in creative rhythms, slow and
fast, including especially its plastics and fleshes.
The Cloud layer, just above the Earth layer in The Stack, makes epic, rapidly expanding energy demands (the total carbon footprint of the world’s data centers has already
surpassed that of the airline industry and is presumed to triple by 2020), and so risk
is not hard to find. Data centers are located to mitigate cost and uncertainty, away
from likely natural disasters, in proximity of cheap or clean energy sources, diverse
power grid interconnects, favorable land use zoning, and inexpensive intermediate
bandwidth, for example.51 Because there is no planetary computational economy that
is not first a planetary energy economy, the limits to growth for The Stack are not only
Moore’s law and Shannon’s law (accelerating the speed of processors and squeezing
more information into existing channels) but also, and perhaps foremost, to secure the
energy necessary to power those data centers, smart cities, homes, cars, roads, smart
objects, and phones, as well as the real costs (or benefits) of doing so at the expense of
other infrastructure, like new roads and buildings.52 In principle, there is a potentially
virtuous correlation at work for innovation across computation and energy sectors,

Earth Layer

93

and the gamble on that potential is another generative accident of the Earth layer. The
continuing growth of The Stack and the computationally intensive transformation of
energy sourcing and distribution infrastructures on which it depends likely cannot
occur without one another. The architectures of new energy-information networks,
including so-called smart grids, require pervasive computational systems to realize necessary gains in the timely, efficient, and equitable distribution of megawatts of energy
across networks. For this, each point in the grid that might produce or consume energy,
which is in principle pretty much anywhere and anyone, must not only be able to
store or transmit that energy, but also to calculate and communicate its activities to
platforms that steer the whole. All electrons must pass through the angelic regime of
recording and optimization, but today such grids are slow to come online.53 Their politics are filled with inertia and gamesmanship, and, moreover, the underlying physics is
uncooperative; electrons do not work “like bits” no matter what your smart city consultants are saying. At the same time, The Stack itself depends on new energy grids to feed
and undergird its growth. It requires a conjoined-twin energy-information network
that can generate, calculate, and allocate those usable electrons point-to-point. Absent
a radical relaxation of energy scarcity by renewable sources, the finely grained electron
sorting between points of production and consumption must be realized at global scale
or the growth of planetary-scale computation will hit physical energy limits and will
stall.54 A more scalable grid of electrons needs to be wrapped inside and around The
Stack’s Earth layer. In short, planetary-scale computation needs smart grids to grow, and
for smart grids to grow, they need more ubiquitous computation. The computational
future of energy and the infrastructural program of computation form such a coil,
one end feeding on the other like Ouroboros, the ancient symbol of a snake eating its
own tail.
Whether or not the risks associated with the energy costs of Stack infrastructure will
outpace the efficiencies provided by calculative technologies as they become pervasive
across industrial sectors is unknown, and probably unknowable at the moment. Prognostications vary from measured good news to very bad news. According to a Greenpeace report on cloud computing and climate change, the electricity consumed by
cloud computing globally will increase from 632 billion kilowatt-hours (0.6 terawatts)
in 2007 to 1,963 billion kilowatt-hours (1.9 terawatts) by 2020, and the associated
carbon dioxide equivalent emissions would reach 1.034 megatons (currently the world
economy’s total energy appetite is roughly 15 terawatts). If imagined as an emergent
nation-state, the Cloud would be today the fifth largest consumer of electricity, ahead
of India, Germany, Canada, France, Brazil, and the United Kingdom. But even this
doesn’t fully capture the climatic and ecological impact of planetary computation.
The extraction of mineral resources to manufacture and dispose of devices and hardware can be extremely destructive in its own right. For their part, data centers are estimated to represent only 20 percent of the information computing technologies (ICT)

94

Earth Layer

sector’s total footprint by 2020, while telecoms infrastructure, PCs and peripherals, will
represent much more. While the shift toward Cloud platforms represents efficiencies
over “dead tree media” and perhaps will ultimately reduce reliance on air travel, it also
enables an exponential growth in data flotsam, such as search histories, redundant
personal media, legally mandated trails of sales receipts, unfiltered spam, backups of
the trails of spam and search, and so on, all of which need to be stored somewhere, and
it is now stored online in various databases here and there. Sometime in the future,
this Cloud landfill of postcontemporary data junk may provide new insights for digital
humanities as to the real nature of global discourse (or existential clues for a future artificial intelligence, itself born of spam perhaps,55 seeking out the meaning of its origin),
but until then, it is just more carbon debt. It is estimated that the electricity required
to send the trillions of spam e-mails worldwide each year is equivalent to powering 2
million American homes and generates the same amount of greenhouse gases as 3 million cars. But the Cloud layer is not uniform, and how it affects the Earth layer depends
on where it is buried. It matters where data centers are located because the available
energy mix ranges from dirty fossil fuels to robust renewables sources (Hong Kong
hosts one of the dirtiest clouds, while Iceland and Sweden are among the cleanest,
and so Iceland has made Cloud hosting a key part of its national industrial strategy). In
the United States, many of the largest data centers (such as Google’s in Lenoir, North
Carolina, Yahoo’s in La Vista, Nebraska, Microsoft’s in Chicago and Apple’s in Apple,
North Carolina) are, as of this writing, all at least 50 percent coal powered.56 The incentives to introduce greater energy efficiencies in data centers and to reduce operating
costs thereby are considerable, and they represent critical competitive advantages for
different Cloud platform players, as will be discussed further in the following chapter.
Nevertheless, without significant gains in energy and carbon efficiency (and cost), it
may be too expensive for the Cloud to “grow” beyond certain thresholds. If so, then less
assured paths of innovation will ensue, many of which may further distort infrastructural access between the global North and South.
Even if all goes well, the emergent mega-infrastructure of The Stack is, as a whole,
perhaps the hungriest thing in the world, and the consequences of its realization
may destroy its own foundation. If growth estimates are correct (or, worse, if they
are too modest), then the collective project of constructing The Stack may tip toward
an equally comprehensive and self-amplifying exhaustion of resources and systemic
collapse. That is the bad scenario, but it is not the only one. The Stack not only consumes energy; it also mediates it and rationalizes its metabolic distribution. As said,
energy is not just the driver of The Stack; it is also one of the things that The Stack
computes. Energy, regardless of its source, is not likely consumed at the site of its capture, but is instead shuttled around a regional-scale network of production, storage,
transmission, distribution, and metering, and in many cases this network is startlingly
inefficient.

Earth Layer

95

“Electricity generation currently accounts for 57% of India’s total carbon emissions
and will continue to do so until 2020. India’s power network is highly inefficient and
much of the generated electricity is wasted. The lack of transparency in the grid makes
losses difficult to measure, but it is estimated that in 2007 India lost 32% of total
generation.”57 For an economy of 1 billion people, one-third of the energy generated
was lost in relay. That kind of signal-to-noise ratio cannot scale. To intervene, hardware consultants and equipment providers evangelize whole-cloth new grids, brought
under the larger rubric of centralized information networks, such that grids for electrical “packets” working like grids for information packets would realize an “Internet of
energy.” Even though to date ecstatic marketing visions far outpace reality, under the
right pressure, incentive, and circumstance, and with enough patience, that may not
remain true.58
Such energy-information networks (however theoretical or actual they may be at
the time you read this book) are central to how the Earth layer functions within The
Stack. They are also themselves designed as software-hardware platforms that can
in principle reduce infrastructural costs and risks, which for some is earned through
greater transparency and resilient decentralization and for others by greater centralization and system optimization. In principle, such grids can reduce peak demand crises through better energy storage, making the use of renewables for baseload energy
more feasible, while also monitoring use through platform-standard metering making
energy markets more liquid, resilient, accountable, and predictable. This may help to
undistort market pricing of ecologically expensive energy use as well as the means
to mitigate some of its associated risks—in theory, that is. For The Stack, this may
allow for the production and consumption of flows of energy that are simple, omnidirectional, and ubiquitous. Any activity that generates more energy than it uses to
sustain itself could invest that surplus into a vast metabolic agora where it powers
and animates distant and complex projects, its muscular and cellular force captured,
stored, and routed to where it can best collaborate with other aggregated exertions to
power another unknown project. Yes, you are a battery. Our most visionary plots have
the Stack’s carbon footprint measured not in debt but in surplus, and likely in our
lifetimes or not, the geopolitics of a postscarcity Earth layer is worth articulating and
defending as an ideal.
In the meantime, we note that many of the most important positive potential effects
of ubiquitous computationally intensive, point-to-point energy flows are on “nonStack” industries. The Climate Group’s Smart2020: Enabling the Low Carbon Economy
in the Information Age report issues confident, sunny scenarios for carbon savings from
ICT in five critical areas: smart grids, transportation, dematerialization, buildings, and
information management. The key interventions include the more nimble transmission grids as discussed above, distributed energy storage systems, congestion pricing,
vehicle-to-grid charging and energy storage, teleconferencing, desktop virtualization,

96

Earth Layer

building and facility management, fine-grain metering, and supply chain and logistical optimization. The conclusion of the report is that if ICT is more deeply integrated
into the fabric of industrial economies, especially in China and India, it would realize
a total carbon savings that is five times greater than the sector’s direct footprint based
on projected growth (ICT’s direct footprint is estimated to be 1.4 GtCO2e in 2020, but
the total ICT-enabled abatement is estimated to be a savings of 7.9 GtCO2e). According
to this model, we cannot afford not to accelerate the construction of The Stack. This is
the conundrum into which we are thrown: Can The Stack be built fast enough to save us
from the costs of building The Stack?
The Earth layer of The Stack is defined by this risk, also perhaps its most critical
(and paradoxical) measurement and prediction challenge: the energy costs of planetary-scale computation on one side of the scale versus the energy savings of Internet
on the other, the latter either rescuing us from the former or instead guaranteeing a
catastrophe already underway. We may conclude that investment must be accelerated
so that the costs of building The Stack do not sink the whole enterprise of industrial
civilization, but if the energy and carbon costs of The Stack are too great to pay for
the construction of the new grids, then the new grids cannot save us from the effects
of those same costs. The Stack is in a race against its own physics, like a long-distance
spaceship that must carry a prohibitive excess of fuel just to push the weight of that
prohibitive excess of fuel.59 If disaster calls, The Stack would also itself be a causality of its own potentially disastrous impacts. Its own machines and materials are also
vulnerable to the foreseeable and unforeseeable disruptions brought by the climate
change that its own appetite would exacerbate and ensure. “The rainfall from Typhoon
Morakot caused rivers to flood in Taiwan flushing large volumes of sediment into the
ocean. This led to several submarine landslides which broke at least nine communications cables 4000m down. It disrupted the Internet and telecommunications between
Taiwan, China, Hong Kong and other parts of Southeast Asia”60 Flooded data centers
and compromised undersea cables can knock out whole networks, which is especially
concerning when you realize that “over 95% of global communications traffic is handled by just 1 million km of undersea fiber-optic cable. Rising sea levels increase the
risk of flooding of coastal cable facilities and may also affect the stability of the seabed,
making cables even more vulnerable.” The really smart grid is the one that still works
once the climatic effects of its construction come back to bite. In the composition of
The Stack, we are conducting an experimental live-fire exercise on its Earth layer. Will
the armature of The Stack organize a resilient computational geopolitics, or will its own
energy thirst, ecological impact, and toxic production footprint finally overwhelm all,
leaving behind elaborate labyrinthine ruins? Will planetary-scale computing prove to
be, in some guise, the metaplatform of an alternative counterindustrialization, full of
effervescent interfaces of metabolic exchange, or instead will it be the final machine,
drawing us into its self-immolation?

Earth Layer

97

21. Sensing and Sovereignty; Polities of Supply and Effect
This risk is not equally shared, and political geography is also redrawn in the image of
that unevenness, as sensor and sensed and cause and effect each become leverageable
sovereign positions. In that governance is bound and determined by how its means
allow it to see, measure, and organize its domains, the systems that mediate governance
bind them to it just as it is bound by them. Nowhere is this truer than in the computational governance of ecologies, particularly for computational megaprojects such as
Planetary Skin, but with the adoption of new media of observation and measurement
come new complications. Is sovereignty primarily for the measurement or for the measured? The referent or the referred to? Who owns the data that all these nodes will be
generating about themselves and their Users?61 The answer will not only reflect sovereign claims; it can also generate them. For example, between the Himalayas and the
Karakoram, near the slippery boundary between India and Pakistan, both governments
as well as nongovernmental organizations, have planted a sizable number of sensors to
detect ice temperatures, water flow, and other telltale effects of climate change. In these
areas, formal and informal borders are unclear and move as the landscape shifts. Freshwater pathways vital to down-mountain settlements also shift, and flows that start on
one side of the line may flow into the other. As development researcher, Sally Daultrey,
observes the inscription of sensor grids and the flows of data they generate become
active participants in these shifts.62 India and Pakistan are largely unwilling to share
the data they capture with one another and thus create a secondary border between
their data sets. The very placement of sensors in certain locations and the control of
the data generated by them become a way to claim some of the always shifting terrain
from their rival, not only through the installation outpost sensor hardware, but in the
claiming of the virtual profile of water or air that a sensor can sense. In other words,
it is not only that when the sensor drifts with the ice pack into the sovereign territory
of one of the countries, then the data it produces now belong to that country, but also
that wherever one country’s sensor drifts into an ambiguous or contested new location,
producing data about that location, then that location itself becomes that country’s
own because its sensor is measuring and enumerating that site. Here the state “takes”
the territory that it is capable of sensing, as the data generate and guarantee a sovereign
claim as much as (in this case, more than) the sovereign claim guarantees the right to
install a sensor and capture data.
Sensing begets sovereignty over the site that is sensed, except of course when it is
does not. Recently China asked foreign embassies in Beijing and consulates in Shanghai
to stop taking and reporting their own weather and air quality readings and asserted an
exclusive right to acquire and report that information.63 In this case, while the site of a
diplomatic embassy might be recognized as the sovereign satellite domain of another
country, the Earth on which and in which it is situated is not; and neither is the weather

98

Earth Layer

that pours down on it. Similarly in the United States, particularly in dry western states,
the issue of “rainwater harvesting” by individual parties is extremely contentious. State
and federal authorities intervene to protect the interests of downstream residents who
rely on access to a legally guaranteed flow versus upstream ranchers who wish to capture the water that falls on their land for their own use. Those upstream claim that “the
state is stealing the rain,” while downstreamers claim that those living upstream are
“privatizing the weather.” Under certain conditions, state management of an ecology
might be seen as an injustice, whereas in others, the injustice is the absence of governmental intervention, though sometimes the terms of that ungovernance take unexpected forms. James Hansen, the former director of NASA’s Goddard Institute, who has
done as much as anyone else to clarify our climatic precariousness, also helped guide
a lawsuit based on the public trust doctrine, and inspired in part by the sixth-century
Byzantine rule of Justinian I. That doctrine stipulates “that common resources like
water and air are held in trust by the government for future generations” and that they
must make good on this charge.64 The claim of the suit is that the federal government’s
failure to suppress climate change is a dereliction of its essential sovereign duty and
must be corrected as such. Another speculative alternative is Amy Balkin’s Public Smog
project, which seeks to transform discrete volumes of the air above into new public
parks through the issuance of emissions offsets. Maneuvers and innovations such as
these may seem odd, but they may also represent a critical path of design intervention
into the unstable geopolitical architectures of the Earth layer of The Stack. Wilsonian
internationalist mechanisms have had a far too limited ability to enact and enforce
effective solutions, as Hu and Obama’s flimsy “compromise” at the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) talks in Copenhagen in 2008 exemplify. Planetary
Skin’s central bank for carbon could not rush in and save that particular day, as the
essential problems of measuring a carbon economy (Who, how, when, where, why?)
would require the most powerful national economies to disclose and share sovereign
information about their industrial empires in ways that interested neither of the two
most powerful prisoners in this particular dilemma.65 We are left knowing both that
impending ecological calamity represents perhaps the most significant challenge to the
very premise of governance that we face today, and also that the Westphalian-looped
state is a dangerously awkward sovereign unit with which to assemble an effective quorum. The Stack’s own mitigation program must also look elsewhere.
We anticipate that with the ongoing convergence of planetary-scale computation
with ecological governance, alternative jurisdictional forms will come to augment
national domains and may, in crucial ways, have greater importance for those who live
within those domains and circumstances than national identity. The alternative sovereignties that they bequeath (or rent) may simply matter more to important outcomes,
but the appearance of any such geographies requires new frames, procedural alliances,
and counterintuitive techniques. Like species that fill a new niche after an ecological

Earth Layer

99

shift, new ecojurisdictions and their unorthodox spaces and organs are more likely
to appear in direct response to an emergency situation than through any parliamentary deliberation. The latter may retroactively codify the former, but is unlikely to first
introduce them. According to Schmitt, the state of emergency provides the generative
exception (and sometimes vice versa), and as it draws eccentric lines, it forces positions
to be taken in relation to them. But these “emergencies” should be understood in both
senses of the word: first as a crisis for which conventional understandings and instruments are inadequate and therefore require or justify unconventional measures, and
second as moments of the emergence of something that was genuinely and qualitatively
not there before. For ecojurisdictions, these emerge around both the production of
energy and the effects of that production. We see this already in the divided constituencies and alliances represented at the IPCC climate talks. Large oil- and gas-producing
countries share certain interests in ecological governance, or in its prevention, that cut
across ideology and continental location, whereas countries whose landscapes serve
as important carbon sinks also seek common cause, as do those whose circumstance
puts them at shared risks for particular kinds of disaster. Shared ecogeographic interests
can matter more than party lines when the transversal economic solidarities of energy
production, and its consequences, come to outweigh cartographic, historical, or ethnic
proximity.
First, we see subdivided energy polities bound by the kinds of energy that they produce and the specific demands of a particular process of extraction. Behind the slow
crawl of petrocitizens, will there be something like an OPEC (Organization for the
Petroleum Exporting Countries) for solar-, wind-, and geothermal-producing regions
around the world? Would that be a consolidation of interests linking, for example,
Japan, Iceland, and geothermal powers to leverage how that energy source is enumerated and calculated as a carbon currency or debt relief mechanism within a larger ecological economics? We strongly suspect that they would rely on different math from
that offered by say, the oil geopolity convened under the flags of Saudi Arabia, Venezuela, and Texas. As part of a team commissioned by the European Commission, AMO
(the research wing of Koolhaas’s OMA architectural studio) proposed a new map of
Europe (now “Eneropa”) based on a similar conjecture. In their map, different areas of
Europe are redrawn such that Spain, France, and Sweden give way to the new regions
of Solaria, the Tidal States, and Geothermia, respectively.66 However, perhaps instead
of new federalisms, even discontiguous ones based on energy production, might we
see instead see a fragmenting of geographies down into superlocal finely grained bioregional localities linked through the much more nimble sensing and calculating tools
now at our disposal? Why start with the blunt brush of the latitudinal state scale? Why
not instead thousands, or tens of thousands, of smaller compu-ecological microjurisdictions, some stable and others lasting only a season or two, many overlapping and
interweaving like the imaginary lines that try to keep Indian ice out of Pakistani data

100

Earth Layer

sets? But if so, how do they enforce their varied interests? Whereas bioregions recognize
the primacy of grounded situation, changing climates, like the Cloud, do not.
At the same time, coalitions of producers can’t represent those bearing the brunt
of global energy use. Ecopolities of those affected are equally important as polities of
producers, and we already see them emerging by emergency. In the wake of Hurricane
Sandy, New York City introduced a system of zones that differentiated proximity to rising coastal water vulnerability. Citizens living in zone A or zone B might be required to
evacuate at different times and might be recognized for different rights of return from
those not occupying the same block-by-block micropolity. In this case, the tactical
invention of emergency ecojurisdictions as a governing geographical superimposition
could not be clearer. As the emergencies that give rise to these inventions become less
isolated incidents, these initially temporary jurisdictions become increasingly permanent, and the provisionality of the exception becomes normalized and concretized into
a new territory that comes to make demands on its neighbors and citizens. For example, the Alliance of Small Island States emerged during the Kyoto Protocol discussions
to represent the interests of low-lying nations that would be most egregiously affected
by raising sea levels. The federation of (not exclusively) islands is spread across the
world, concentrated along the equatorial belt, and has proven a formidable aggregate
voice in global climate talks. Perhaps as well we will see an alliance of those threatened
by desertification, or a federation of agricultural regions overrun by migrating insects,
or, equally likely, a league of those who, in warmer subpolar regions, will become new
agricultural powers, such as Russia and Canada.
These kinds of ecojurisdictions arise out of circumstances that may persist for generations to come, but the form they take at different geographical scales and their varying ability to demand and defend claims are heterogeneous and asymmetrical. It would
seem unlikely therefore that these quasi-sovereign forms will congeal into one master
format as regular as the Westphalian-looped state, and so the rights, claims, and forms
of identities that different groups are likely to claim will remain diverse, contradictory,
and unevenly effective. At the same time, emergency is as emergency does. Ecological
instability remaps self-interest and geopolitical multipolarity in strange ways, and in
some cases, the claims of those affected are truly existential, such as for “drowning
nations” such as the Marshall Islands, Tuvalu, Maldives, and Kiribati. The international
law questions provoked by their possible erasure from the surface of the planet are
stunning and even bizarre, and no existing legal framework is well suited to answering them.67 If the entire land of a nation is permanently drowned, is it still a nation?
Do former inhabitants still possess even fishing rights in the waters now on top of
their homeland? What about the right to issue currency or passport? “Environmental
migrant” is not a globally recognized legal category of refugee today, though it likely
will be, but for whatever nation takes them in, what form of citizenship do the displaced retain? What effective sovereignties (e.g., monetary, legal, geographic) does the

Earth Layer

101

state that once represented them (or still does) retain in relation to those offered by
their new hosts? Do countries that take in persons permanently displaced by climate
change get land, water, and commerce rights in return? The exceptions that necessitate similar improvisations regarding sovereign geographies now scrambled by rapid
ecological change will only get more painful, and the solutions only more convoluted
and violent. Among the apparently uncomputable accidents of The Stack are the ghost
sovereignties of the swelling Pacific, even as they exemplify the most critical geopolitical design questions now set in motion by and for its Earth layer.
22. Designing for versus Designing with Emergencies
Many of those design questions can be evaluated only by first evaluating the different positions in which they would situate the designer. There is a world of difference
between designing for, against, or with these conflicts; as often as not, attempting one
thing may result in an opposite outcome. The Earth layer is held in place by both an
absolutist interest in computational transparency and the debilitating contradictions
and ultimate impossibility of that transparency. Telescoping between planetary and
atomic scales, The Stack introduces synthetic computation deep down, deep up, and
deep into abyssal scales of intricate matter. That introduction can begin with the provision of an Address that allows a location to communicate data across scales, and that
addressability may or may not be motivated by, for example, an avaricious splitting
open of the world, from the atmosphere to the atom, toward a mandate of full-spectrum dominance. But programs for total capture are also vulnerable to their own comprehensiveness. Their interconnectedness can make them brittle.68 The Stack works by
vertical integration, across scales and across technological genres. This allows it to function as a core platform for multiple economies at once and to provide universal valuation and exchangeability only to the extent that participants can be represented as
similar computational events. Because of this, it can also absorb, dissipate, and deflect
forms of risk that might make any one layer more vulnerable, but at the same time,
that integration can also distribute and amplify destabilizing forces and factors. This
is not a bug; it is axiomatic of platform logics. In the constitution of a durable order
through a hyperlinking of earthly energies and forms—things, people, words, cells,
molecules—we recognize that this order can and will also be the generator of the disorder that it hopes to regulate. Philosopher Brian Massumi writes, “The figure of today’s
threat is the suddenly irrupting, locally self-organizing, systemically, self-amplifying
threat of large scale disruption. The form of threat, fed by instability and metastability, is not only indiscriminate, it is also indiscriminable; it is indistinguishable from
the general environment.” The rough bargain of the universal platform, and of fullspectrum governmentality, is that the systemic feedback loops that give the structure
life can also be dangerous or even fatal to the whole. For systems that link across scales,

102

Earth Layer

small events can quickly and unexpectedly scale up to threaten much larger processes,
and supercomputing systems in particular not only provide no guarantee that they
can contain those amplifying irruptions, they can easily magnify and intensify them.
Besides rolling and interlocking component failure, the circularity of this infrastructural vulnerability is also the path by which the program of absolute transparency and
computational omniscience comes to defeat itself by infinite regress.
Some years ago I was at a panel with HP research scientist Stanley Williams, who
recounted a remarkable assignment he once had. He was part of a group of computer
scientists who had been asked by the US Department of Energy to propose an architecture for a computer that would be capable of a high fidelity predictive simulation
of the entire planetary climate, and of monitoring and simulating the entire planetary
climate in real time. The group concluded that such a machine would require zettaflop
computing, that is, a system capable of 1021 floating-point operations per second. At
the time, the fastest supercomputers were measured in petaflops (1015); on-tap exaflops (1018) are still years away. Williams discussed how it is possible that zettaflop
computing would demand a very different processing architecture from one based on
silicon transistors and might instead be based on photonics and nanoswitches hybridized with silicon to increase performance without loss of volume and power. He spoke
of layers and layers of nanoscale wiring weaving into dense synaptic computing fields.
Could it be done? Somewhat anticlimactically, Williams also shared the conclusion
of the group’s report: based on current technology technology, the necessary specifications would mean that the computer would not only be roughly the size of Paris,
but it would consume so much energy that it would be the single most significant
anthropogenic climatic event that it itself would be modeling! Short of fundamental
breakthroughs, his anecdote underscores the paradoxical recursivity that undergirds
the demand for global ecological omniscience, especially for an accidental megastructure such as The Stack.69
With the promise of irruptive emergencies in mind, as well as Williams’s figure of a
megamachine eaten by its own image of the world as it tries in vain to source enough
power to measure and simulate its own power consumption, how then should we think
about design in relation to Stack emergencies and emergences? Remember that for our
discussion of Schmitt, the exception draws an exemplary space that exists both inside
and outside the law at once. It is where authority is absolute but derived less from
normal law than from the sovereign decision both granting and granted by the state
of emergency, one taken ostensibly to protect the framework of law that it itself supersedes. In relation to this, design must be genuinely suspicious of remedies that valorize the amelioration of symptoms. States of emergency often begin as a “temporary
measure” —precaution, pilot program, protective custody, probation, prototype—but
over time, through both political shift and in the normalization that appears through
a design’s ingenious accommodations of the emergency, the exception becomes the

Earth Layer

103

rule, and the rule becomes the rule of law because it is now is seen as the normal shape
of things. In the face of emergencies, design is asked to provide adaptation for those
negatively affected and to give form to accommodation such that a sovereign decision
would not be fundamentally threatened by the emergency that it has called into being.
Design’s job too often is to reform the emergency, so that over time, the exception
sheds its temporary and provisional character as its effects settle out.
Consider the stakes for what this enables and prevents. Among Isamu Noguchi’s
most heartfelt projects, but not best known, is a series of schools, playgrounds and
meeting halls he designed for the Japanese American internment camp at Poston, California, during World War II. As Bruna Mori writes, Noguchi feared that those camps
would be permanent. He presumed that the emergency was perhaps not a temporary
episode but the new state of affairs for his friends and extended family. As such, the
camps would demand more careful design to make them as livable as possible for the
unforeseeable future. Of course, at the time, no one could know whether the internments were temporary or not, and it is precisely this well-meaning making permanent
of the provisional exception that is worrisome. Had Noguchi’s proposals been built
to their full intended extent, the camps may very well have become more permanent
than they were, and perhaps the freedom of the interned was to some degree aided by
the lack of design accommodation undertaken to normalize their camp’s exceptionality. Today many well-meaning projects enroll design to work, like Noguchi’s did, to
provide better comfort to those caught within real emergencies, such as refugees, displaced persons, and disaster victims.70 Without discounting the obvious help that good
shelter provides to alleviate the acute misery of such experiences, we must be honest
in seeing that accommodating emergency is also how a perhaps illegitimate state of
exception is stabilized and over time normalized. If by sponsoring a commission, the
perpetrator remains immunized from disruption while the interned and displaced are
reformed and reconfigured, then design on behalf of the emergency aids both victims
and victimizers. This danger is especially severe if we believe that a declaration of the
emergency, and the political reality of its exceptions, is already dubious in its own
right (such as an infinite war or terror, an ethnic profile that allows for the suspension
of legal rights, or the wholesale capture of an entire country’s Internet traffic). Similar
soft normalizations are also at work in some of the most easy-to-follow programs for
climate change mitigation, including, and especially, those that promote the superiority of preindustrial economies. Some accept buffering an anthropogenic economy
against the tides of its own effects by a minimal decorative alterations, while others
spiritualize their basic confusion regarding means and ends and seek solace in folklore; many combine both in varying guises. Instead we should plot systemic interventions based on deeper scales of operation that might arrest the eventual immiseration
of places, species, and landscapes by securing lines of flight for them. “Restoration,”
yes, but as part of a wider geopolitics of geoengineering. We hope that the short-term

104

Earth Layer

self-congratulation of accommodation by innovation can be inverted along its own
seams and made successful despite itself. We hope that design can take on a different role from the agent of immunization-through-mitigation on behalf of a bad-faith
sovereign and can instead work less in response to the exceptional emergency than on
behalf of the emergence itself. This design needs to graduate from forms of practice
that defer so much agency to authorities who claim but cannot defend incredible decisions over the arbitrage of exceptions, and needs to stop providing paramedic gestures
that give them support.
It is because there is no one governance format for climates and electrons that the
space for design is open at all. A communitarian integration of local techniques of
measurement and mitigation into a more immediate tapestry may be an attractive
vision for some, but a singing chorus to the invisible hand of flat networks is not a
scalable posture of resistance to the status quo; to the contrary, programmatic localism and the democracy of means is a play for weakness. Without strong force-of-law
mechanisms (and machines) in place, it is doubtful that design can possibly intervene at the superhuman scale of an planetary ecology, which, however, then leads
us back to the contradictions of full-spectrum geography (but necessarily a compulsion to omniscience) with all its attendant problems, gaps, and failures intact. Moving away from an untrue position doesn’t make the new position truer. By way of
comparison, merely inviting everything into a “parliament” (of all things) is to ask
them to mimic and recite an old-fashioned, even reactionary, kind of political speech,
but do strong computational alternatives seem any less arbitrary?71 Is some currency
backed by tons of carbon or gigaflops instead of US dollars (or gold or cryptocurrencies) a greater or lesser danger than the failures it would hope to ameliorate? Moreover, where is the limit to the conceptual violence of turning nature itself into a kind
of permanent emergency, climate change into its final exception, and global warming
into the masterwork of this ambient terrorist? Involving the planet as a ubiquitous
enemy to be managed cannot end well for humans. What price is this to pay, even
for a better currency? Does emergence necessarily shift from an open set available to
unexpected incursions, recalling Deleuze’s meditation on the sands of California, to
a closed loop, a synthetic landscape regulated as an objective resource? Yes and no. A
synthetic landscape can also provide for new apertures in and out, especially the kinds
unavailable while sitting on a beach. Within the Earth simulation machine demanded
by planetary energy governance, the scalar relations between the local and global flipflop in ways that may multiply, absorb, and flatten alternative economies of energy
exchange between big and little actors, and the most difficult step for geo-political
design is to learn how to game the difference. In other words, the real design issues
for the Earth layer are not defined by how well we can calculate risk and stage-manage
disaster, but rather how well we engineer the path for one world to strategically fall
apart into another. 72

Earth Layer

105

23. Designing the Earth Layer
By way of summary, we note that energy ecologies can confound state geographies
because they work both below and above the scale of states’ formal capacities to sense
and observe which, in principle, extend only up to the limit of horizontal looping borders. Ecological emergencies suggest new geopolitical design based on data and energy
jurisdictions, ones that can augment the nation-state, if not also demote it or defer it.
In doing so, they substitute a politics of anthropic subjects for one of carbon flows,
energy flows, and their effects, and in this regard, politics is partially refocused from
the qualification of elections to the quantification of electrons. But this shift cannot
by itself design for less violence, as any sovereign force, including The Stack, requires
a continuing supply of disruption to renew its assignment to enforce force as such. As
in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans, the failure of a state to maintain
even basic infrastructural protection can ultimately serve to renew its charter to expand
and regularize protection against an external enemy, now cast as a hostile climate provoked into unpredictable patterns and requiring a new bulwark of collective mitigation
and enforcement. These are less geodesign programs of curation and creation than of
a militarization of chemistry, a different and unwinnable type of warfare.73 It frames
the unspoken-for public face of a quantified landscape not as our open perch within a
particular astronomic neighborhood, but as a frontier of dangerous and vengeful toilets
dotting plots of Earth as yet unmapped until brought inside as mere agriculture.
Instead of fighting a ubiquitous ecological enemy with higher-resolution countermeasures, a key aspect of the design program is to invent better economic technologies
for valuing and evaluating what is inside and outside as such. Our ecological emergency is an exceptional state of things largely built out of unaccounted-for transactional externalities, neither legal nor illegal per se, but that nevertheless cannot be
expunged from the physical world that a sovereign state tries to see, name, and count.
In relation to Foucault’s identification of a sovereignty of markets, that sovereignty is
partially held in the right to identify whether an externality is in fact external, and so
whether the exception needs to be accounted for.74 Determining what is and is not
accounted for—addressed as being inside or outside the economy—is also a determination of what that sovereignty is accountable to. Today this works by the normal sorting
of what is and is not an externality, not only to a given transaction but also to the core
reason of an economic model that might be validated or invalidated thereby. For those
models and for what they do and do not claim in total, the right to deny identification is as essential as the right to assign it. For an emergent governance of ecologies,
that includes a right of denial regarding the existence and extent of climate change
itself, and in gradient degrees, this death wish spans all vestigial Anthropocenic political theologies. It claims an equivalent right to adjudicate ecological emergency not by
omniscience but by a kind of blindness, and in this case, that blindness is a form of

106

Earth Layer

unreason willing to see only what it has already seen, but not what actually appears to
it now. It is a sovereign decision drawn from inverse hallucinations: not seeing what is
actually right there in front of you. It arranges for both an absolutized surveillance, as
well as the right not to see what appears in the lens, and so in this regard, “seeing like
a state” or “seeing like a market” also means protecting blind spots as needed.
By contrast, computational megaprojects such as Planetary Skin do have an important part to play in building and thinking alternatives for the Earth layer of The Stack,
and we shouldn’t dismiss their potential based on the naïveté of their initial goals and
marketing. As a rule of thumb, I recommend more megastructures, not fewer, and yet
Planetary Skin cannot really “manage what it measures” because ultimately it cannot
measure what it thinks it can measure. Instead the Earth layer should be designed by
thinking at the spatial and temporal scales of the ecological emergency itself, which
means to build with the self-amplifying irruptions, not by policing them. Is the reliance on the identification of ecological noise—a standing enemy of excess and waste
to be disciplined and normalized—also to foreclose possibilities and to guarantee that
Anthropocenic global society, as it exists now, can only be the antecedent enemy of
another Stack-to-come? If we fashion the Earth layer of The Stack in these terms, we
have set ourselves up as the enemy of the enemy of the enemy of the friend we hope
to conjure up. The math is against us.
Finally, as for the scale and program of the lines and frames we inscribe and the
worlds we present by them, I would rather that design draw too big than draw too
small. As we know, Anthropocenic energy platforms largely rely on sucking fossil fuels
out of the ground and burning them in the sky, but planetary-scale computation cannot really grow if it powered by the oozy corpses of Mesozoic vegetation. Can we power
the planet other than by eating the planet, or at least find a better way to do so?
Splitting atoms (or, better, merging them) still holds some promise, as does the direct
capture and storage of the energy shining down every day from our sun. While all
of Earth’s civilizations are by definition solar powered, if sometimes indirectly (consider the ancient photosynthesis that made possible what goes into your gas tank), the
amount of solar energy we use is nowhere near the total amount theoretically available to us. Thinking big, we recall that in his 1960 paper, “Search for Artificial Stellar
Sources of Infra-Red Radiation,” Freeman Dyson surmised that a sufficiently advanced
civilization would come to require not just more energy from its sun, but eventually
all the energy from its sun.75 He supposed that one way to do this would be to build a
sphere around the sun that would capture its energy (minus a bit of infrared radiation)
and use it to support engineering projects elsewhere. The sphere could be a solid ball
or a latticework of satellite collectors arranged in longitudinal or latitudinal rings, or
perhaps arranged in triangular networks like a geodesic dome. As noted above, currently the global economy uses about 15 terawatts of energy, but consider what it
could do if it had several orders of magnitude more than that (Earth now gets about

Earth Layer

107

175 petawatts of radiant energy from the sun, and we are about 150 million kilometers
away). Science-fiction authors, Charles Stross in particular, have updated the Dyson
sphere conjecture to include macrocomputational geoengineering.76 Beyond collecting
energy to run machines somewhere else, the solar megastructure would also be a vast
star-sized computer, known as a Matrioshka brain, that is able to support unimaginably
complex and powerful synthetic calculation and intelligence.77 Perhaps some variation
on this sort of megastructure will be, as Stross has suggested, composed not around a
star but around a planet, such as Earth, where it will use the raw material of the stellar
body itself as a computational substrate, and perhaps (like Galactus) also eventually
consuming that planet by its operations. It is of course impossible to know what lifeforms will survive the Anthropocene, let alone if they will want to engineer carnivorous Turing machines at this scale, but such conjectures help coax a necessary shift
in our thinking about the ground and figure of natural and synthetic computational
landscapes. At stake for The Stack is not only a design and engineering program but a
political-philosophical maneuver as well; though as should be clear, these are all but
impossible to untangle from one another. As such it may be that the purpose of the
Stack megastructure is less to archive and rationalize our bizarre digital cultures than
to deliver the platform logics that will allow geodesign and geoengineering their full
due as modes of governance. For this, the Earth layer is not only The Stack’s schematic
foundation; it is also the driving force and form of its logic: the world remaking itself
in waves, bit by bit, pebble by pebble.

Cloud Layer

There is no doubt that we are currently witnessing a decisive turning point in history, comparable
to the one that took place at the end of the Middle Ages. The beginning of the modern age is
characterized by the unstoppable process of the progressive elimination of “feudal” political formations dividing the national units to the benefit of kingdoms, which is to say of nation-States.
At present, it is these nation-States which, irresistibly, are gradually giving way to political formations which transgress national borders and which could be designated with the term “Empires.”
Nation-States, still powerful in the nineteenth century, are ceasing to be political realities, States
in the strong sense of the term, just as the medieval baronies, cities, and archdioceses ceased to be
States. The modern State, the current political reality, requires a larger foundation than that represented by Nations in the strict sense. To be politically viable, the modern State must rest on a
“vast ‘imperial’ union of affiliated Nations.” The modern State is only truly a State if it is an
Empire.
—Alexandre Kojève, ”Outline of a Doctrine of French Policy” (1945)1
No society can make a perpetual constitution, or even a perpetual law. The earth belongs always
to the living generation.
—Thomas Jefferson to James Madison Paris, September 6, 17892
Heavy medium, light signal ; light medium, heavy signal.
—Unknown

Aristophanes’ play The Clouds is a parody of intellectual presumption and its gift economies based on debt virtualizing all meaning into nothing but tactical rhetoric.3 Does
the same go for our Cloud Polis? As it draws its own lines, walls, and envelopes, their
multiplication puts into play eccentric geopolitical designs including the delamination
of normative Westphalian state sovereignty from its referent territory and the introduction of another territory on top or below. At the same time that Cloud platforms also
take on traditional governing assignments such as public cartography, legal identity,
currency, protocol allegiance, even patriotism, states themselves also evolve toward
becoming Cloud-based entities.4 In combining these, a Cloud Polis is built of thickened

110

Cloud Layer

plural geographies and noncontiguous jurisdictions; it mixes some aspects of US superjurisdiction over the Cloud (and over state-space) with others that resemble the charter
cities carving new partially privatized polities from the whole cloth of desovereigned
lands.5 These platforms extract revenue from the cognitive capital of their User-citizens,
who trade attention in exchange for global infrastructural services that provide each
of them a fixed and formal online identity and a license to use its services. Perhaps
these early accomplishments of planetary-scale computation to redraw political territory in its own image point toward a more universal transformation of the organization of sovereign space and its organizing technologies. The Cloud layer is low in The
Stack, above the chthonic forces of the Earth layer, from which it sucks the energy and
minerals that course through its expansive megastructural body. It is also below the
City layer into which it installs data centers and distribution nodes and for which it
performs incredible feats of instantaneous calculation. While the term cloud computing
may be traced back to the writings in the 1980s on “life streams” by Unabomber victim
and Glenn Beck courtier David Gelernter,6 the idea of computing as an on-tap utility
served from central processing plants is as old as computer science itself. It builds on
distributed server and terminal architectures, extending shared computing resources
across a networked organization, and just as the regulation of industrial modernity was
given tempo by the longitudinal standardization of railroad and telegraph timetables,
the beginning of the Cloud could just as well be dated to the inauguration of the UNIX
epoch (January 1, 1970) and the starting point of UNIX Time used to synchronize computers across a network (and which today helps synchronize, for example, Linux, C,
Java, and Javascript).7
But the footprint of the Cloud is measured at the scale of continents, not enterprises. Some see it as an uneven computational troposphere, others as a prototype
universal Turing machine, arranged not with tape but with uneven networks of fiber
optics, data centers, nested databases, terminals, and browsers.8 The Cloud layer is also
a geopolitical machine, erasing some geographies and producing others, forming and
destabilizing territories in competitive measure. It is at this level of The Stack that
the modern coherence of the state, which would produce one sort of public, and the
operations of platforms, which would produce another, can come into conflict, overlapping and interlacing one another without universal jurisdiction or resolution, but it
is also where they can reinforce each other with more pervasive forms of ambient governance. The geopolitics of the Cloud is everywhere and wants everything: the platform
wars between Google, Facebook, Apple, and Amazon, anonymized servers routing the
angry tweets from street battles, Anonymous going up against Mexican drug cartels,
WikiLeaks crowd-sourcing counterespionage, Tor users building on top of Amazon Web
Services services, carriers licensing content, content providers licensing bandwidth,
proprietary fiber networks connected trading centers, and on, and on. It might seem
at first blush that these events, each perhaps pushing legal boundaries in its own way,

Cloud Layer

111

should be understood as disruptive contaminations of a standing political order—acts
of resistance to the system, even. Yet in their own consistency, this stockpile of exceptions is probably better interpreted as part of the constitution of another emergent
order (a nomos of the Cloud even?). It is an order derived from the structural and technical protocols that locate different Users among different operations and condition the
actions they take from there. As a governing nexus of The Stack, this order identifies,
produces, and polices the information that can move up and down, layer to layer, fixing internal and external borders and designating passages to and from. In doing so, it
generates more lines and borders, not fewer, and so its apparent universality is actually
densely divided against itself.
24. Platform Geography
In mountainous regions, trees above the cloud line are sometimes invisible from the
vantage point of cities in the valley below. Sometimes it looks as if the gray sky has
decapitated the peaks. But for the Cloud layer, what is invisible is less what is above
than what is below the point where the computation touches the ground. Unseen but
not placeless, the trans-urbanism of the Cloud layer is defined not just by the distribution of terrestrial borders, but also by the terraforming recentralization of nodes—
urban, financial, logistical, political—in the service and purpose of its networks (e.g.,
former Siberian missile command bunkers are turned into icy data centers, and entire
skyscrapers in downtown Los Angeles are turned into massive, stacked switching hubs
for every major telco by CoreSite/Carlyle Group). Above ground, the Cloud makes its
own kind of temporary logistics plantations at exurban perimeters or near, or indeed
inside, regional airports. The warehouse and supply chain centers that turn commands
in databases into the traffic of real goods constitute a shadow network of itinerant
packages and only slightly less itinerant laborers. Amazon and Walmart’s fulfillment
centers in places like Hebron, Kentucky, Goodyear, Arizona, and Fernley, Nevada, are
staffed by a multitiered outsourced and re-outsourced population of sorters, packers,
and movers. During Christmas, when demand for short-term labor is acute, Amazon
will make use of “workampers,” often senior citizens moving in large recreational vehicles from one fulfillment center to another, coming and going from Amazon towns as
demand dictates. Guest workers of the algorithms: Grandpa, the Wandering Morlock of
The Cloud.9 Here we glimpse the prototype of a future Cloud feudalism.
A constitutional geography is at work. As the nomos of the Cloud rotates from a twodimensional map to a vertical, sectional stack, its topography is shaped by the multiplication and superimposition of layers of sovereign claims over the same site, person,
and event. The microenclaves that it spawns are a pixelated patchwork of discontiguous
partial interiors and enclaves. Their double exposures are the exceptions that constitute
a new rule. Strategic networks of data centers, fiber-optics cables, energy pipelines,

112

Cloud Layer

freeways, warehouses, and shipping ports magnetize other geographies around themselves, generating legal exceptions, economies of monetized cognition, and platform
wars for expanding populations of Users, both human and nonhuman. So through the
Cloud layer, it is less that The Stack emerges in the service of or in opposition to world
governance than that it dissolves computational governance into the very fabric of
things—platform immanence—and perhaps the productive accident of the Cloud layer
is exactly this rotation and interweaving of regular and irregular sovereign geographies
into still largely unmapped configurations.10 Its everyday lived geopolitics is like that
of Besźel and Ul Qoma in China Miéville’s novel The City and the City, twin cities only
partially visible to one another even as they occupy the same location, each dependent on enforcing a willed ignorance of the other’s presence, constantly policing one
another’s breaching.11
The Google-China conflict is exemplary of this interweaving. It can be interpreted
reasonably as geopolitical conflict between empires, both leveraging their different
state-corporate-military-information network systems to claim the free soil of planetary computational territory. It is more fundamental than that between two megastate
actors; it was and is a conflict not only over the right to control search engine results,
but indeed over the predominance of two different modes of sovereignty. The conflict
pits a state that would dominate and determine the network sovereignty of information and energy flows versus a platform that would, by assembling users into another
real network and imagined community, exceed, in deed if not letter, the last-instance
sovereignty of the state and determine an alternate polity in its own image.12 The alternative that the platform poses is perhaps both too big for the state to control (the platform connects people and things and banks of data across planets) and too small to
control (Users ultimately could access the constitutive data packets of the latter regardless of any Great Maginot Firewall). The Stack itself coheres from conflicts such as
these not by masterplan but by the accumulation of tactical solutions into a massively
distributed inscription, one not circumscribed by a single stretch of land but spread
across multiple layers in vast sectional landscapes. To understand how to design and
engineer that inscription differently, we first consider in more detail how its conflicts
are articulated.
25. The First Sino-Google War of 2009
The First Sino-Google War of 2009 may well be the opening crack in a very different
kind of war over who or what governs global society, one less between two superpowers than between two logics of territorial control. One of these sees the Internet as
an extension of the body of the state, or at least beneath the state in the priorities
of sovereignty, and another sees the Internet as a living, quasi-autonomous, if privately controlled and capitalized, transterritorial civil society that produces, defends,

Cloud Layer

113

and demands rights on its on and which can even assume traditional functions of the
state for itself. For this, Google is a nonstate actor operating with the force of a state,
but unlike modern states, it is not defined by a single specific territorial contiguity.
While Google is as reliant on real physical infrastructure—its empire of data centers
are by no means virtual—its terrestrial footprint is more dispersed and distributed than
partitioned and circumscribed. On the superimposition of the two interlocking spaces,
consider the breach theory of Fang Binxing from the China Academy of Engineering
and one of the main designers of the infamous great firewall. In November 2011, he
warned a conference that the Chinese Internet does not have the capability to disable a global Internet service whenever it wants to. He used the example of Google
and said it was a pity that although Google had retreated from China, its service was
still accessible in China: “It’s like the relationship between riverbed and water. Water
has no nationality, but riverbeds are sovereign territories, we cannot allow polluted
water from other nation-states to enter our country.”13 This is an amazingly succinct
rehearsal of the older European nomos’s juridical separation of land and sea, fixed and
liquid, made into parable.14 While Fang likely was not familiar with Buckminster Fuller’s admonition that “the fearful sovereign nation politicos will find that trying to
arrest networking is like trying to arrest the waves of the ocean,” Fuller, it is more
certain, was never given the assignment, as Fang was, of building a glass dome for a
billion Internet users.15
Shifting the figure of water from a metaphor to geography, consider that for
Schmitt’s history of the nomos (that is, Carl Schmitt, not Eric Schmidt), the territorial
domain of nations was always defended by the naval capacity over the omnidirectional
glacis of the ocean in light of Google’s filed patent on water-based data centers.16 This
floating cyberinfrastructure would, in principle, greatly reduce the energy and cooling costs of hosting and serving the peta- and exabytes of data that will constitute an
eventual planetary cloud computing platform. It may also neatly symbolize a productive crisis of territorial jurisdiction, one that alters how truly pervasive computation
may demand, or activate, new forms of agonistic or cosmopolitan political habitats.17
As discussed in the Earth layer chapter, data centers, as the hard technical core of the
Internet, demand massive provisions of energy, mostly to keep processors cool; with
only about half of the world’s 7 billion or so people using the web in any given month,
the anticipated growth curve is steep. Where will the energy come from? How can
Google possibly feed the energy appetite of the data centers that would provide ambient supercomputing to the next 3.5 billion human users and the next 5 billion to 500
billion object users of the Internet of things?18 Oceanic data centers theoretically would
help solve this by using both tidal and wind energy to power the stations, as well as the
abundant supply of water to assist in the cooling process, but in doing so, the literal
offshoring of such critical infrastructure also raises issues about the jurisdiction and
legal control of data and the governance of the emergent Cloud Polis. What if a data

114

Cloud Layer

object is originated in Beijing by a Japanese citizen, uploaded to a server off the shores
of Vladivostok in international waters, and then used by a kid at an Internet café in Las
Vegas to commit a crime in Brazil? Does one country’s data privacy and prosecution
laws have clear means to control this? But of course such what-ifs are already everyday problems. The oceanic datacenter symbolizes the infrastructural offshoring that is
one productive accident of the Cloud layer: the delamination of the layers of territory,
economy, and sovereignty, one from the other, potentially perforating the domain of
the state with the economies of nonstate infrastructure beamed in from the middle of
the open ocean. This may conjure images of other ad hoc circumventions of national
geography, such as pirate radio, offshore banking, and unrecognized microstates. But
unlike these, the Cloud layer is not a peculiar outlier from an otherwise stable system of
territorial sovereignty; rather, it is the technical basis of an emergent global system, an
exception that takes on the force and diction of a geopolitical norm. The Cloud layer
hosts more than a few streams of pirate data; it can carry entire cultures, economies,
societies, and religions. And so it is not simply where an alternative geopolitics will
take place; rather, in taking and making territory, it is also how it will take place. The
Cloud layer is characterized less by a shift toward a new equilibrium of formal state
powers now working at the scale of planetary computation than by the incongruities
between modes of governable territorialization. For this, and unlike the Westphalian
consensus, it is the absence of mutual recognition between types of actors (a state and
a platform, in this case) that keeps something approximating a true nomos of the Cloud
unresolved and perhaps irresolvable.19
My argument then is not another prophecy of the declining state withering away
into the realm of pure network, but to the contrary, that the state’s own pressing redefinition takes place in relation to network geographies that it can neither contain nor be
contained by. As cloud-based computing platforms of various scales and complexities
come to absorb more and more social and economic media, and do so on a planetary
scale, the threads linking one data object to one jurisdiction bound to one geographic
location become that much more unraveled. It’s not that the state cannot follow those
threads, rather that when it does it takes leave and becomes something else. Other
exemplary exceptional territories, such as tax-free Special Economic Zones, also mark
the visible effects of network globalization in general, but the underlying function of
emergent Cloud systems to enable these demands special consideration, especially at
the level of the individual User. The rights and conditions of citizenship that were to
whatever degree guaranteed by the linking of information, jurisdiction, and physical
location, all within the interior view of the state, now give way perhaps to the riskier
prospects of a Google Grossraum, in which and for which the terms of ultimate political
constitution are anything but understood.
For example, we know that the modern state is also bound to a particular set of
protocological interests and generative legal codes and that the membranes of their

Cloud Layer

115

jurisdictions are defined by them, but the transposition of juridical media from legislation to computation produces a rather different set of ground rules. Certain political
positions are built already into the hardware, not allegorically but literally. For example,
for many processor chips from the last few decades, “core user” is a sovereign figure
who can generate subordinate administrative subjects—who in turn can control the
calculative access of other users.20 What law, passed where, could undo this polity,
based not on formal constitution or really even the perfunctory end user agreement? As
we have seen, states respond forcefully, sometimes by attempting to directly compete
with these kinds of sovereignty and sometimes by absorbing them as their own new
norms.
At the scale of agonistic geopolitics, the variance in strategies for governing sovereign space, between states, platforms, and their combinations, seems to do more to
multiply the variables than to reduce them toward consensual maps. For the emblematic Sino-Google conflict, the productive friction is also the result of a superimposition
of two incommensurate logics of territory and governance: one is a cognitive capitalist
proto-polis predicated on universal information rationalization, and the other is a geographically circumscribed central command that sees the Cloud as an extension of the
body and charge of the national state. In this case, the two are like unmerged layers
of an image pasted onto the same canvas, each a different shape and scale, but each
demanding the recognition and acquiescence of the other. In the messy practices of
billion-User scale technopolitics, even this arch opposition cannot itself hold. What if
instead of simply staying put or leaving China, the Google Grossraum instead evolves
over time and blankets or pours down on Chinese sovereign territory in such a way
that the state would be as powerless to enforce policy on it as it is on the rain?21 And
if we imagine this circumnavigation to be well subscribed by Chinese publics, then
how divided are their loyalties and how will they identify with dual citizenships such
as these? What do states become in relation to this perforation when the circumscription of land guarantees that much less? For party planners, nightmares do such things
make.22 Others, looking back from that virtual future in which Google (or some similar
Cloud platform) more fully connects China’s continent of Users with or without the
formal acknowledgment of the Chinese government, may have more fondness for a
Cloud Polis in which multiple User identities compete, conflict, and overlay without
also congealing into a tidy individual User citizen-subject. That is, the superimposition
of dissensual sovereignties applies to the people as well. Toward a design of such systems, what are the real limit conditions of the Cloud layer as an actual machine?
26. Cloud Infrastructure
What is the Cloud, exactly, if understood as a vast discontiguous apparatus? Like The
Stack as a whole, the Cloud layer is itself a terraforming project, covering the globe in

116

Cloud Layer

subterranean wires and switches and overhead satellite arrays, simultaneously centralizing and decentralizing computing and data storage and the social relations that depend
on them (and vice versa). Cloud infrastructure’s energy and water appetite demands
specific landscape accommodations, including putting data centers in unexpected
locations (inside office towers, ice caves, underground bunkers, coal mines, carved-out
mountains, dead malls, inhospitable islands, old churches) all in the name of strategies
both rational and strange (cheap energy, cheap space, proximity to oceanic passage,
lax regulation on data storage, earthquake and flood avoidance, perimeter security,
ideal temperature control).23 Above ground, Cloud infrastructure is serviced by torqued
logistics networks of warehouses, roads, factories, containers, ports of call, airports,
and package routing hubs that together allow it to route physical objects in the way
it routes data packets. In doing so, the layer absorbs metadata about each thing and
each relation of exchange, all translated by algorithmic militations of cognition, data
semantics, manufacture, demand, and response optimization as it links these across
continents, compressing and expanding economic rhythms and cycles.
Those Cloud economics are predicated on efficiencies of centralization made possible by simultaneous and exponential price drops in data computation, storage, and
transmission, which are driven in turn by increases in the amount of data produced
by the billions of devices that continuously pump information into these platform
services.24 This virtuous cycle of devices in the field uploading data to cheap central
storage, for processing in datacenters and redistribution to other users and devices,
fuels the rapid centripetal centralization of information toward a small number of
global Cloud platforms capable of supporting and leveraging service infrastructures
at such a massive scale. At the edges of this network, the merger of data processing,
storage, and distribution into a composite platform makes possible the generic provision of computational capacity into an on-tap service utility for large organizations
and individual Users (e.g., people, sensors, devices). In many cases, individual applications are provided free of immediate charge and monetized through the capitalization
of User cognition by advertising. In other cases, Cloud application interfaces charge
based on per unit of use as defined by different combinations of number of Users and
total amount of data processed, stored, and transmitted. The ultimate effect of the
centralization of Cloud services, paired with faster wired and wireless bandwidth to
end devices, is to link almost any person, thing, animal, building, car, plant, or smart
mote into supercomputing platforms. This allows each such end User to perform or
contribute to otherwise impossible calculations, all of which further centralize the platform’s economy of uses, effects, and profits. Access to live data and peer-to-peer communication streams means that aggregate responses to individual interactions can be
calculated in remote data centers and relayed back to the User almost instantaneously,
as if the computation and all the data it is based on were happening in the palm of
her hand. Dumb devices are infused with seemingly cosmic omnipotence. Servicing

Cloud Layer

117

generic supercomputation draws any thing and any place into a formal interrelation
and interdependency, flattening both hierarchies and nuances. Today’s end user Cloud
apps will grow in complexity and capability only as exponentially larger pools of data
are aggregated, analyzed, optimized, and made available through networks of application programming interfaces (APIs) with which developers can link oceanic reservoirs
of information into smart services that learn as they are put to greater use. Cloud services will include greater artificial intelligence streamed into graphical, voice, or object
interfaces with which we interact in naturalistic ways. Most likely, however, they won’t
do this primarily over the open Internet as we know it, but through more narrowly
designed and owned networks in which competitive advantages (drawn from physical
infrastructure to data optimization to energy efficiency to format lock-in) will drive
and delimit everyday computational economics.
Another reason the open Internet may provide a diminished fraction of the load
for next-generation Cloud services is that it is getting full. There is a finite amount of
information that can be pumped through the network as it is currently constructed,
and that limit may be appearing on the near horizon. In order to ensure that future
services can stay online and continue to scale, Cloud platforms will likely continue
to build their own secondary and tertiary versions on top of or in place of the “old
Internet,” using both open and closed protocols to consolidate proprietary publics
and networks. How full are the physical channels of the Cloud layer already? While
it is extraordinarily difficult to exactly map the scope and shape of the Internet, as so
many avenues are closed off from scrutiny,25 it is nevertheless generally agreed that
the total amount of data produced and transmitted doubles every one or two years
(perhaps faster). A recent study estimated that in 2018, 6.5 zettabytes of data (trillions
of gigabytes) will pass through the Cloud, with 31% in the public Cloud and 69% in
the private Cloud.26 The increase is seen as a function of faster processors in end user
devices, which can produce more data and feed then into common platforms, but the
growth rate of shared data is increasing faster than the spectral efficiency of the optical
fiber networks over which it passes can accommodate it. Even techniques like multiplex polarization will probably not suffice in the long term.27 We may like to think
of fiber optics as providing functionally limitless bandwidth, but at a zettabyte order
of magnitude, for a planetary Cloud ultimately linking trillions of devices, this is not
true. Unless new technologies, such as widespread multicore fiber, are widely deployed
in the next decade, the physical limits of how much information can actually pass
through a given channel may introduce new economies of bandwidth scarcity, prioritization, and pricing.28 At the same time, newer networks with greater carrying capacity,
as well as faster signal throughput, may provide new kinds of Cloud services previously
only imagined, such as holodeck-quality virtual environments. Such accomplishments
may steer primate evolution toward shared intersubjective experience, introducing
fantastic new genres of narrative, design, architecture, poetry, medicine, and music

118

Cloud Layer

at a planetary scale, or it may allow a select few to watch 8K LOLcat videos from 10
angles at once.
The pressure of that physical limit also pushes against the geoeconomics of the
Internet backbone and private Cloud platforms, forcing how their development impacts
on political geography as a whole. Instead of thinking of the Cloud as a bunch of individual private computers connected to data centers by big public pipe, it is perhaps
better to think of any (at least partially) gated Cloud network as a single vast discontiguous computer, linking servers to browsers and back again, such that functions that
may have once happened “inside” any one device now happens on the device’s “outside,” now on and in the network itself. Information input, storage, processing, display,
and so on are handled by different components in the wider computer architecture,
but when very fast optical links connect devices, supercomputers, dense populations,
server farms, and enterprise clusters, they can delink and distribute that machine architecture, spreading it even across oceans.29 But in practice, the Cloud (and any one Cloud
platform) is much more than one shared network computer. Different actors (e.g., telcos, states, standards bodies, hardware original equipment manufacturers, and cloud
software platforms) all play different roles and control hardware and software applications in different ways and toward different ends. Internet backbone is generally
provided and shared by tier 1 bandwidth providers (such as telcos), but one key trend
is for very large platforms, such as Google, to bypass other actors and architect complete end-to-end networks, from browser, to fiber, to data center, such that information
retrieval, composition, and analysis are consolidated and optimized on private loops.
Consider that if Google’s own networks, both internal and external, were compared to
others, they would represent one of the largest Internet service providers in the world,
and by the time this sentence is published, they may very well be the largest. Google
indexes the public Internet and mirrors as much of it as possible on its own servers so
that it can serve search results and popular pages quickly to Users, regardless of where
the original page may originally be coded, sourced, and hosted. It also maintains largescale networks for the distribution of its own User-facing content, such as YouTube
videos, Gmail, and Search, and for the shuttling of the incredibly large “copies” of the
Internet from one Google data center to another around the world. We could also then
think of Google, the integrated platform architecture, as a kind of metacomputer that
absorbs and processes data so as to maximize its own growth. When I log in to Gmail,
my laptop becomes, for a moment, a peripheral device of that larger Google metamachine spread across the world. This ubiquity affects how data traffic itself is composed
and managed. For example, software-defined networking (SDN) allows a network to
prioritize, plan, track, and optimize the ideal routes of sets of packets in a way that is
more sophisticated, composable, and responsive but less neutral and less dependent on
political decisions made elsewhere.30 In the long run, the investment and expertise in
developing the infrastructure necessary to maintain the world’s largest consumer Cloud

Cloud Layer

119

platforms may trend away from networks on which packets are sorted and routed in
neutral, but not always reliable, pathways across shared pipes, and toward very large
data providers and Cloud platforms, such as Google, or toll road developers, such as
Comcast, controlling traffic over their own networks for their particular purposes. The
future maturation of global Cloud platforms as quasi-independent geopolitical domains
may be determined to a significant degree by their ability to deploy their own competitively effective, end-to-end cyberinfrastructures.31 This will redraw the practical boundaries between open and curated computational services, public and private data, state
and corporate geography, User and service, and Interface and infrastructure. The end
result supports more ubiquitous, finer-grained supercomputation, but deals a severe
blow to the social ideal of general-purpose computing, as hardware devices would also
likely be further tuned to suit specific platform strategies, perhaps locking out others (see the discussion of the Apple Cloud Polis below). As we already see for financial
networks, general Cloud-based geopolitical enclaves may appear as indirect functions
of exclusive networks, monetized by providing premium services to those that can
pay, including many that are traditionally managed by states, leaving other publics
to wrestle over thirty-one flavors of net neutrality. As a global trend, this mode of
computational production also bears the potential for a much more stratified mesh of
enclaved Cloud experiences and a multitiered, more socially asymmetrical Cloud that
provides premium services for some (including privacy, the ultimate Cloud service) and
bare-bones services for others (their identities and interactions more exposed to the
elements and to exploitation.) Still, the most pressing geopolitical design problems are
those posed by what Cloud platforms already are and do. By examining some of our
dominant platforms more closely—reading and interpreting them—we can perhaps predict what they will become, but, more important, perhaps steer their becoming as well.
27. Cloud Polis
In tracing the outlines of our current Cloud-based polities, we see that platforms have
assumed and absorbed several core political functions of the modern state and innovated new modes of governance besides. Cartography, for example, has long been a
core competence of states, particularly when they are busy expanding their empires,
naming locations, planting flags in them, and rendering these on their own maps for
the first time. Throughout the colonial era of globalization, the basic description of a
“new” territory over which a state might wish to internalize into its jurisdiction, and
over which it contests control, may be legally precedent to whatever private strategies are subsequently put in motion, or they may come later as decorative legitimation of earlier speculative adventures.32 Either way, sovereigns have long claimed
and enforced the right to name and objectively represent the territories they govern.
Today contested lines on maps still symbolize geopolitical tensions over sovereign

120

Cloud Layer

influence, as the many intrigues over islands in the South China Sea attest. Consider
then the curious episode in 2010 when Google Maps slightly shifted the line marking
the border between Nicaragua and Costa Rica. Troops were summoned and war over
the ambiguous territory seemed possible. The naming and measuring of the ground
over which and into which politics might maneuver was, however unintentionally,
remade not by either of these states but by a Californian software company. The situation was defused, but a new precedent was made. In the US context, compare this
to Lewis and Clark’s westward excursion, or the cartographic corps sent out during
the New Deal to expand and reinforce federal territorial vision and the right of final
say-so over what parcel is where. More recently, Google made news by formally recognizing Palestine as a delineated nation, well ahead of its eventual full status at the
United Nations,33 and between the two institutions, it’s not altogether obvious which
recognition will prove with the benefit of historical hindsight to be the more efficacious. These episodes hint at a potential swap in the relative positions between the
cloud and the states in the definition of a last-instance geography that is now also
described to states by Cloud platforms instead of the other way around. The ambiguities of the rotation in priority, and perhaps of which institution finally underwrites
which, persist in differing models of Cloud Polis. For one, the state shape-shifts into
a Cloud platform, and for the other, Cloud platforms functionally displace states by
assuming their functions.
States move into the Cloud. We see this in guises from the benign to the sinister,
from progressive gestures of information democratization like data.gov to the troubling
surveillance armatures associated with the National Security Agency, the Patriot Act,
and superjurisdiction over international Cloud data.34 From the prosaic gathering and
reportage of information to its citizens, on the one hand, to the clandestine hoarding of massive troves of data about its citizens (and other countries’ citizens), on the
other, states in the cloud transform what states can see, and what “seeing like a state”
(and listening and sensing like a state) actually entails.35 With this shift in perceptual
techniques, habits, and dispositions, states are inspired to look for some things and not
others. The work of contemporary governance is transformed toward the management
of multiple, irregular, asymmetric layers of Cloud platforms, and as the “eyes” of the
state evolve, its bones and blood will follow.36
Much has been made in recent years about a reinvention of government through
the more intensive and intelligent strategizing of its institutions as public data-generating, -sorting, and -disseminating systems, and their optimization along the lines
of any other large peer-to-peer information service. The sunny ethos of “government
as a platform” imagines Users accessing democratic states in the same way that a private Cloud platform allows Users to retrieve and program structured data for their own
secondary purposes.37 It sees platforms spawning new clients, developing economies
and microtargeted utilities, and it asks then, “If states are conceived as platforms,

Cloud Layer

121

wouldn’t they work the same?” One version of this presumes a general inversion of
government’s data-capturing mission now outward toward the exterior-facing world
of active constituents. This might lead to a greater modularization and even outsourcing of governmental services to constituents interested in providing and innovating
these.38 However, the PRISM/Snowden affair and the general revelation of the core role
that consultants like Booz-Allen Hamilton and Palantir play in the federal information
complex demonstrate that this disintermediation of the work of the Cloud-based state
is not only well underway, and that the more individualistic-entrepreneurial story of
“government as a platform,” as told by publisher, Tim O’Reilly and others, is at most
a supplemental augmentation of a well-established apparatus. In fact, one shudders
at the thought of what a more individually distributed subcontracting of state Cloud
surveillance might look like. At the same time, the most far-reaching visions of the
open government movement might still represent a transformation of the state itself
into something unknown—perhaps an apps-based queryable megamachine like Planetary Skin or Google Earth, but with obvious and significant differences.39 The optical
positions of a state—how it sees the world and its constituents and how its citizens see
themselves reflected through the ambient quantitative commons—might bear all the
benefits and bankruptcies of earlier forms of communicative reason. As these try to
reform technocratic media into humanist channels, they are not necessarily predicated
on an overcentralization of expertise; rather, we see how some core mechanisms of
governance on the ground become less like a central command machine and more like
an ambient, generalized utility at hand for anyone interested in parsing the databases
and spreadsheets and deploying them toward new designs. Here the maximal state and
the minimal state convene and even converge.40
Clouds become de facto states. “Platform as governance,” the inverse of “government
as of platform,” is suggested just as strongly by today’s Cloud Polis. The structures and
limits of a global Cloud platform cannot not reorient the contexts in which the fragility of state sovereignty is contested. Like charter cities, we see specific Cloud platforms
absorbing forms of sovereign differentiation between people and places that used to be
the exclusive domain of the state and can only imagine what kinds of “sovereignty services” this may lead to. How will the Cloud-based delineation (or absence of delineation)
of land, identity, energy, value, territorial interiority and exteriority, and so on, come to
mutate the overlapping layers of everyday law and life? It is less that Cloud platforms
ultimately replace states than that two domains become dramatically less distinct from
one another, interlacing and folding up in new ways, producing emergent institutional
forms not reducible to the direct combination of the two. The ability of the Cloud to
achieve this is based not only on the networking of information between locations,
but on its interdependent position in the larger Stack, linking energy economies, Cities,
Interfaces, and Users into a global but wholly uneven platform. That governing logic,
privileging the Cloud layer as timekeeper and space maker, is built into the technical

122

Cloud Layer

architecture of The Stack and imposes itself on states and traditional geopolitics as
much as the inverse.41 That is, Cloud platforms not only have geopolitical ramifications
and implications; they are a geopolitical condition and constitution in their own right.
Cloud Polis is populated by hybrid new geographies, new governmentalities, awkward
jurisdictions, new regimes of interfaciality, and so new (and old) imaginary communities, group allegiances, ad hoc patriotisms, and inviolable brand loyalties will inevitably follow. Some of these may be archaic fundamentalisms now given a new mission;
others are more novel and progressive, or soupy mixtures both futuristic and atavistic
at once. The assignment claimed by planetary-scale computation is then not only to
challenge the state’s monopoly on legitimate violence (the force of material as well as
of material force) but also its monopoly on legitimate citizenships. As discussed, the fate
of every location, and person and User, is overlayered with multiple, asymmetric, and
irreconcilable platform allegiances, rights bequeathed and values extracted. That layered patchwork is the result of both the global circulations of “citizens,” understood as
a mixture of people and things, as well as of the fractured ability of any one imagined
community to incorporate the lives of its adherents when it must share space (and
Users) with multiple simultaneous alternatives.42
What is the proper role and ambition for this mode of Cloud Polis? How should we
imagine the role of a geopolitical actor with the future scale, program, and capacity of,
say, Google or Apple or Alibaba, as well as the smaller players that will fill out the space
cleared by similar enterprises? First, the space over which Google’s (limited) capacity to
generate or mediate proto-citizenship and economic sovereignty is neither comprehensive nor properly pluralistic. It is derived not from some classical constitutional claims,
but from the mission statement to maintain the everyday nuts and bolts of planetary computation (“to organize the world’s information, and to make it universally
accessible and useful”) and from this the presumption of an historical mission. In the
administration of these global input and output interfaces, a kind of governance over
the networks and territories mediated by them does emerge, Cloud Polis taking shape
not through master plan but through accumulated microtechniques of regularization.
By contrast, if the modern capitol building was an architecture that symbolized a legal,
jurisdictional, and geographic center from which the terms and limits of sovereign citizenship might radiate concentrically, then the data center located out of site or even
in the extraterritorial, un-national plane of the open sea, draws instead a technical and
symbolic mesh of uneven threads flossed through multiple territories at once. From it,
smaller assemblages of economic activity emanate, and practical norms of privacy and
participation are worked out by both everyday habit and deliberate predation.
Again, this is not to suggest that even this form of Cloud Polis somehow formally
secedes from national interest and control, but rather that as national interest and control pivot to the Cloud, the Cloud absorbs assignments of sovereign identification. Data
centers and large switches also continue to operate under some normal authority, such

Cloud Layer

123

that each Westphalian state claims (contested) rights over data within its geographic
loop. The data that any one data center might house and distribute might be globally accessible in principle but also may be filtered or unfiltered by both national and
international authorities (including mass interception of all traffic, national firewalling
and keyword sorting, targeted deep packet inspection, or, in the recent examples of
Egypt and Syria, complete blocking of a national top-level domain). International and
transnational jurisdiction are even less settled, as evidenced by US superjurisdictional
enforcement episodes and by controversies at the UN International Telecommunications Union over the role of member states to control, filter, and tax entry points of
data entry into and out of their recognized territories (or even to adopt locally idiosyncratic Internet addressing schemes).43 The lines are unclear, dotted, smudgy, knotty,
and self-contradictory, but the lines do exist and are multiplying in number. As the
cat-and-mouse games of perforating and mending the membranes of national virtual
borders continue, a kind of accelerated evolutionary episode is playing out, and the
mutual constraint between state and extrastate actors brings strange moments of symbiosis. Instead of the simplistic schema of centers versus networks, centralization versus
decentralization, elites versus the people, we observe instead states becoming networks
and networks becoming states, nodes becoming more like edges and edges becoming
more like nodes. The intrapenetration of Cloud geography and state geography results
in another spatial-institutional model based on the logics of platforms and on platform
sovereignties that don’t fit into those frameworks. Something like Cloud Polis is still an
awkward embryonic form of governance, both for and through planetary computation, and likely will be for some time.
That said, as the Cloud is planetary is scope, state control of its systems is guaranteed only to the extent that private providers continue to respect (by consent, force,
joint venture, outright merger) the practical sovereignty of the national jurisdictions
in which their servers are installed, where their offices are headquartered, how exactly
their data structure economic exchanges, and how their monetization of those data is
or is not taxed. That arrangement is both resilient and unstable in various measures
and tracks the successes and failures of globalization itself. Today most Cloud service
providers have constraining jurisdictions built into service plans. For example, Amazon Web Services segregates the serving of hosted data according to several geographic
“availability zones,” allowing developers to deploy specific versions of their application
to specific users in specific countries according to local laws and priorities, regardless of
where Amazon might be hosting or mirroring their data. However, the sorting of state
space and data space is not always so neat, and the unintended effects of innovative
interconnections between Cloud publics can be calamitous. Recall the Bank of Iceland’s
ill-fated online banking venture in the United Kingdom, where easy access to “offshore”
digital deposits and inopportune loans help to crash both nations’ economies and contributed to a long-term destabilization of Iceland’s (and Europe’s) solvency. Ultimately,

124

Cloud Layer

as a design problem, the potential political economic architecture of the Cloud Polis is
at best a blurry composition, and like any other form of governance, its emergence is
unevenly and asymmetrically violent.44 While it standardizes and flattens some symbols, geographies, and economies, it simultaneously frays and multiplies others. There
is no way to guarantee either outcome in advance, and it is precisely the unforeseeable
reversibility of these effects on any one location that makes the Cloud Polis central to the
forms of sovereignty it mediates and which mediate it.45 In other words, the increasing reliance on Cloud infrastructure produces unintended geopolitical effects precisely
because its power to govern through the observation of geographies, and the calculation of strategic information in the competition over those spaces, is always in the
end reversible. Government data willingly opened to the public for its edification and
employment, reinforcing the bonds and identification with a particular state apparatus
generating this bounty, are also a potential basis for countergovernance, resistance,
revolution, and the multiplication of unpredictable microsovereignties. The opposite—
oversecuritization making systems brittle—is equally risky. That any innovation may
accomplish one and the other, or how it may be deployed for one agenda and also its
opposite, depends to a degree on the Interfaces we use to engage them and on what they
as Interfaces connect and disconnect for us and from us. This is how The Stack connects
Users and Clouds, Cities and Interfaces. But even then, any one Interface (that is, any one
instrumental image of the platform as it is decoding its functions to us) is enrolled by
more than one imagination at the same time. Interfaces are dream worlds, however
restricted. They are also the real techniques by which power in inscribed by and for the
imagined communities of geopolitical intrigue. But because interfacial images, like the
machines they mediate, are tools for more than one geography at once, even the semiotic specificity of any one interface is a poor guarantee against the ultimate reversibility
of the Cloud Polis. Just ask Costa Rica.
28. Platform Wars
For The Stack, Cloud Polis represents an extremely complex design problem, because
while it may determine so much, it guarantees little about the predictability of outcomes.
Renewal and innovation or totalitarian dystopia: neither is assured or foreclosed. While
we can survey the landscape of Cloud platform empires as they exist today, we can’t
presume that the current arrangement of stakeholders and their positions will continue
without dramatic unforeseen disruptions to the status quo. It is also possible (even
probable) that the most decisive and geopolitical Cloud formations are still some years
off. While Google, the specific company headquartered in Mountain View, California,
is its most obvious exemplar of today’s platforms, my argument concerns something
far less immediate than the product and service road map of any single corporation.
The figure of The Stack is that of a politico-geographic-technological framework that

Cloud Layer

125

does not yet exist, and may very well never exist, but serves as a conceptual-technical
structure to think with and against as we compose what does emerge. For this, what
makes the Cloud layer of The Stack so important is that today each of the major USbased ventures—Facebook, Apple, Google, Amazon (plus Walmart, Oracle, IBM, FedEx,
UPS, Microsoft, Goldman Sachs, Cloudera, Dropbox, and others) — embody and enact,
each one differently, a prototype (a “prototypology”) for our Cloud geopolitical futures.
The architecture of their brands and their software platforms is not only representative
of geopolitical interests; each one in its way is a geopolitical model. To be clear, the
more relevant questions for us are less how they might extend US superjurisdiction
than how each constitutes different and incomplete options for what emerges around
it and in spite of it. They perform this role both as privately held corporations and also,
as Umberto Eco pointed out years before (1994) in his prescient satirical essay, “The
Holy War: Mac vs. DOS,” even as exemplars of alternative techno-theological programs.46
In sequence, we’ll examine the models posed by Facebook, Apple, Amazon, and perhaps the most significant for this stage of the argument, Google.47
29. Facebook
Facebook’s Cloud Polis is built directly on its Users’ personal lives and their interest in
each other’s personal lives. Its reserve currency is what the theory of symbolic interactionism in sociology calls the “presentation of self-identity.”48 In the reconstruction of
the social networks that link the social-psychological capital of hundreds of millions
of people, Facebook represents a voluntary and highly limited simulation of human
culture, and for this, it is a singular achievement. Whereas Wikipedia, for example,
publicly automates topical consensus, Facebook captures that social capital and guards
it from strangers, displaying it through limited interfacial prisms. In turn, it leverages
that capture into metacapital to be sold to microtargeting advertisers. Facebook’s Cloud
model is rendered in the cumulative captured graph of the lives, likes, and allegiances of
its active users, who spend more time on Facebook than any other site, and who have
amassed the largest single repository of mechanical images in human history on its
servers.49 Gabriel Tarde’s nineteenth-century dream, for a sociology based on diagramming society bit by bit from every microencounter until emergent patterns come into
view, is suggested, if not also partially realized, by social network platforms such as
these.50 Just as for Google’s search algorithms, for Facebook’s social graph simulation,
the index is the innovation. If the paradigmatic cultural energy of the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries was the invention of new media technologies and the exploration
of these as vehicles to drive avant-garde forms of expression, then twenty-first century
invention focuses instead on the scanning, archiving, cataloging, sorting, visualization,
cutting and pasting, sensing, and serving rationalization and capitalization of archived
reservoirs of content. Further, “new content,” like the billions of images uploaded to

126

Cloud Layer

Facebook or its Instagram, are already archived, socialized, and disseminated in near
real-time. For such services, the archive is the primary channel of communication; the
index is the medium of the message.
As a model for Cloud Polis, Facebook’s social graph relies on at least four techniques:
identity and display, network closure, visual communication, and fabricated currencies.
Through the profile and the feed, Facebook gives standard form to acts of social display, filtering them through perpetual refinements and updates. Participation in this
narrowed Cloud “public” means a consistent, performative fashioning, and the “care
of the self” as a public artifact of its own shadows and connections. Peers like what you
say, they share your offerings, and, in time, they subscribe to you, the individual character in your own reality mini-show. The fabrication of the self becomes the primary
project of this platform, at least for the User, but in time, this general model could take
many different forms, as subjectivity and agency are dispersed into nonlocal networks
and assignments. For Facebook today, that means Tarde meets Sartre meets Pavlov:
this “hell of other people” is drawn as a social prison of timelines, passionate positiontaking, political sentimentality, “weird tricks” for this and that, pseudoscience, teen
and mid-life narcissism, and stalking, all paid for in microseconds of attention.
The Facebook model is a closed and largely opaque network. How exactly its Users
network with one another is based on proprietary graph algorithms and subject only
to periodic, largely useless protests and petitions. Spawned in the image of the Ivycovered walls of elite mating grounds, Facebook maintains the reality and illusion of a
well-pruned curated lifestream (restricted from other random people, that is, not from
Facebook), such that one’s social network is not spammed by usurping gatecrashers.
In some ways, this closure mimics the enclaved and privatized Cloud itself, monetized
mostly by a few early investors. Whenever pressed, it seems that Facebook explicitly
and emphatically does not endorse the cosmopolitan vision of information infrastructures professed by Google. However, as default rentier of our social affiliations and
wannabe concierge of their capitalization, this conservatism may stunt the platform’s
long-term evolution.51 For one, it pushes Users toward regulatory remedies for perceived mismanagement of what they take to be “their” content in a “public” forum.
It also invites the legal preemption of many techniques for social graph capitalization
that Facebook (or any other graph-based Cloud) might wish to pursue and leverage
in the future toward further independence. The company’s leadership is unloved and
popularly perceived as selfish, petulant, and uncommitted (as reflected in the company’s IPO problems, the David Fincher movie, a hundred Sean Parker jokes, a smirking
Eduardo Saverin defecting to Singapore to avoid paying his taxes, and the contrarian
public persona of early funder Peter Thiel). There are, however, many other examples
of network closure that deliver very different effects (Apple’s own take on the walled
garden is discussed below) not the least of which is the model provided by China’s
portfolio of social media properties like Renren, Sina Weibo, Tencent/QQ, and others.

Cloud Layer

127

All of these are interested first in the extraction of some sort of surplus from a captured
social domain over which they exercise a slightly resented monopoly, and each looks
at the other—state-sanctioned company versus private holding—as an ambiguous variable in its own strategies. The Facebook model (including its Instagam property) is also
of a visual Cloud. It boasts human history’s single most prolific consolidation of images.
As a primary channel of User communication, here the image overwhelms text as the
basic gesture of self-fashioning. Should the Facebook platform bend toward socialized
video, then the future of the feed may turn into semi-random cinema, edited by one’s
network affiliations, and circulated by peers as social currency: real-world Chatroulette
as the future of our species’ intersubjective symbolic thought.52 From the Facebook
platform’s perspective, the ability to glean information about Users from large-scale
artificial analysis of image content also greatly amplifies the scale and scope of the
social simulation project.53 The acquisition of Oculus, the virtual reality hardware company, may extend this into more immersive visual cultures, perhaps operatic platformscale multiplayer online games built from the personal media of Facebook’s User base
(or perhaps just 4D Farmville hallucinations).
The Facebook model is also based on artificial currencies. The platform has spawned
a secondary economy of twitch-and-reward game apps, which feed off the central
graph like little symbiots. In the midst of the European financial crisis, Metahaven
proposed only half-ironically with its Facestate project that perhaps Facebook credits
could replace the euro as a common currency. In this inside-out microeconomics of
social capital extraction, we are all World of Warcraft Gold Miners, spamming ourselves
to get through the day.54 However, the final form of that currency is still undecided for
Facebook (as it is for PayPal, Apple Pay, Google Wallet, bitcoin, and Walmart Banking,
for example). How a functional “social wallet” might emerge from the consolidation
and transparency of our linking and delinking, one to another, generating and paying
debt with attention and reputation, is an important component of a truly interconnected Cloud Polis. None of the other digital currency projects is built on the core currency over which Facebook still has privileged position of access: the microeconomies
of recognized social debt from which the value of money is primordially derived (at least
for humans; HST algorithms are a different story).55 But to date, Facebook’s furtive and
ill-conceived experiments at the monetization of that capital are based on strategies of
rent more than mediation, such as reciprocal likes, selling post promotion, charging
users to message each other, and so essentially taxing the graph’s own growth. This
may be a doubtful recipe for the conversion of public obligation into private money
and back again. The magical ontology of money requires a trust so trusting that it
requires no deliberation, and while social graph-based platforms may be where new
currencies will be sustained in the long run, Facebook may have soiled its own punch,
and so perhaps we’ll see banks becoming social graph platforms before we see graph
platforms becoming banks. Still Facebook is the most widely engaged social media site

128

Cloud Layer

with well over a billion active users and so its potential for structuring human communication according to its own logics of platform sovereignty remains profound.
30. Apple
Apple has assumed a mantle from Disney for preeminence in mass-scale, closed-loop
experience design.56 By comparison with the extractive micromanagement style of
Facebook, Apple’s closed world is ruled with luxury carrots more than with behaviorist
sticks. Inside, its public expects total design into which (or onto which) Users can invest
individual desires for creative self-idealization. Apple’s origin story is now as deeply
ingrained in the American myth of the prodigal hero-entrepreneur as that of Peter
Parker bitten by a radioactive spider. While the company’s roots extend back into mid1970s Northern California hippie hacker culture, in important ways the Apple weltanschauung was not crystallized until the airing of Lee Clow and Ridley Scott’s Superbowl
TV ad in and of the year 1984.57 Here the driving theologic dichotomy of the brand is
established, cleaving the line between Apple (individual, color, youth, cool, iconoclast)
and IBM (mass, monochrome, old, awkward, hierarchical), a creed equally appealing to
1960s counterculture and its boomer aftermath, as it is to the John Wayne wing of the
American Right. An LSD-eating Buddhist and his gentle programmer pal set in motion
what would become Rush Limbaugh’s favorite company.58 The story of the company
and its brand have provided privileged archetypes to postindustrial capitalism: a populist concept, rejection by the old guard, a near-death experience, the return of the True
Idea, blockbuster appliances, an actual death and hagiographic reverence, the passing
of the doctrine, and so on.
Apple has also done more than any other company to make the rhetorics (and sometimes reality) of design into a central problematic for digital culture, far beyond the
relentless cognitive utilitarianism of a traditional human-computer interaction (HCI)
seeking to annihilate all ambiguity. The company turned computation into a mass
medium of self-articulation: a main ingredient for any socially and economically sustainable Cloud Polis. Beyond the Cloud (or computing even), Apple also exemplified the
power of brand as a core competency for publicly traded companies. It turned brand
into content, encouraging customers to speculate on the brand experience in the third
person, not only as something they themselves experience but such that their performative discussions about the brand experience are a core aspect of the experience.
For Apple, this is founded on the idea that Apple uniquely “gets it,” and if you get
Apple, then you are perceptive enough to get it, too. This conspiracy of the illuminated
first drew its fundamental distinction against corporate cybernetics in that 1984 ad,
and then against Microsoft and the (supposedly) crass, artless boredom of corporate
IT departments and the malignant malevolence of Bill Gates. But today the terms of
Apple’s Manichean doctrine are less clear and less confident. Apple’s light is now cast in

Cloud Layer

129

contrast with what darkness? Is it Apple versus Google or Samsung, or what? The space
is too fragmented; others are doing newer, more colorful and imaginative things. The
software experience is now best recommended for its seamlessness, tastefulness, and
predictability. These are hardly the watchwords of revolution. To paraphrase and invert
the referent of the 1984 ad, the Apple model for Cloud Polis may be a walled “garden
of pure ideology,” but it is backed up by inscrutable attention to physical detail in the
design and manufacture of its hardware lines that allow its User to touch a tactile cloud.
The Apple model of Cloud Polis is based on four primary emphases: hardware/physical touch, App ecology, cult brand/leader, and enclave aesthetics. The iOS, iTunes, App,
and third-party content ecosystem is the basis of the company’s Cloud platform, but
the Apple “public” coheres through mutual esteem for the premium hardware that
Users carry with them in daily life. As Cloud Polis develops beyond the data-on-screens
framework of today, it is an open question what the design brief for Cloud hardware
will include, and so it may lead a company such as Apple or Google well beyond the
domain of consumer electronics as we conventionally understand them and deeper
into the personal effects of the world (as Apple’s Watch and Google’s Car and Glass
projects foreshadow). In this, platform lock-in versus neutral interoperability becomes
an even more existential problematic. Apple’s initial forays into massive User-centric
Cloud services have a spotty track record (think MobileMe), while its audience-centric
Cloud services (such as iTunes) bend whole industries toward them and generate fabulous profits. Still, it is at the level of the operating system that Apple’s model platform
logic coheres, and it is through premium hardware that it is guaranteed. As usually
credited to Jony Ive’s talent and Steve Jobs’s perfectionism, Apple’s physical objects
ground the Cloud as something you can and want to touch and accompany you. This
“design” adds dramatically to profit margin per device and underpins other channels
of involvement and lock-in, pushing User experience of The Stack toward dictates of
affect, flattening and cajoling the megastructure to “just work.” Beyond individual
touch, the physicality and tactility of Apple’s platform are also available as architectural immersion in the global footprint of Apple Stores, where an ideal Apple culture
is performed by teams of ideal Apple Users, the youngish, intelligent, helpful, at-ease
store staff. In this architectural network of mall-based parishes, one does not merely
shop for electronics; one is to be supported in the goal of creative self-realization. The
expert experiential design of the object, as well as the inspirational native habitat from
which it is adopted at point of sale, cannot be separated from the political coherency
of the Apple model of Cloud Polis. It is renewed less by new services than by a dramaturgical cycle of tactile collective participation and self-representation. No future Cloud
Polis can afford to overlook these accomplishments. However, despite its total design
model, Apple’s platform logic is underwritten by its (now much-copied) innovation of
Apps and the App Store. Instead of providing every possible software service, product,
or function that could be anticipated, it instead administers a centralized market for

130

Cloud Layer

mini-applications, connecting developers and Users indirectly and ensuring profit for
the former and some degree of code quality for the latter. An outgrowth of a hardwareled strategy, Apple’s App ecology means letting developers assume the risk and reward
for the long tail of software experiences. Even so, these must hew to the platform’s
core interaction affect or face banishment. Whichever way the Cloud (particularly the
mobile Cloud) might evolve, Apple is positioned as a preferred physical “last millimeter” of delivery (the feel of “look and feel”), the exact physical point where User and
Cloud touch. (There is more on Apps in the Interfaces chapter.)
Apple’s walled garden, as opposed to Facebook’s, is utopian in tone, a paradigmatic
community unto its own: autoexceptional. Jobs spoke of Apple as “an Idea,” wholly
unlike the consumer electronics and software companies for which his contempt was
always easily forthcoming. The Apple Cloud Polis also rests, then, on the enclave aesthetics of that concept and how it extends into particular choices about the company’s relationship to the governance of terra firma. The reader is perhaps familiar with
the tale of Jobs’s Mercedes SL55, which he leased every few months so that he would
never have to affix license plates. Having to do so would have required him to publicly
acknowledge, in this small way, that he was personally subject to the general jurisdiction of the state of California and to its administrative control over roads and drivers.
This conflation of an ethic of exceptional design work with political exception and
exemption is inherent in the Apple model for Cloud Polis and gives wind to the effervescent patriotism among its Users. The ecstasy of revelatory launch events, the hermeneutic interest in the company’s history and future product road maps, not to mention
hagiographic reverence for founding figures, all mutually strengthen real and imagined
bonds between the Apple public and the brand.
As the delamination and re-interweaving of Clouds and contemporary states point
toward one possible future of proliferating and overlapping enclaves and exclaves,
the Apple totality is a model for an elite sovereign format, walled off from the relative chaos of outside publics. As ever, utopias are closed systems—islands—but where
“Apple” is finally located is not so clear. Whereas Disney’s original plan for EPCOT
Center was a utopian community, a real Disney city realized with diminished ambition as Celebration, Florida, the town of Apple, North Carolina, is the home of one of
the company’s most important data centers, but it is a very unlikely site for residential
relocation. Apple’s comprehensive attention to the interiority of product experience is
well suited to a future featuring nation-sized gated communities wherever they may
encircle themselves. For this, the exceptional enclave and the camp work both ways.
The dystopian megastructures on which experiential seamlessness depends, like Foxconn’s factory cities where Apple objects are assembled, are the necessary mirrored
doubles of the Apple polis itself, each cocooned in opposing bubbles yet each interior to
the other. While some are drawn into live-work-sleep factory cities, where even suicide
is not allowed, others are tucked like happy frequent flyers into a benevolent, tastefully

Cloud Layer

131

designed compound in the sky (more on this pairing in the City chapter). While the
Apple model for Cloud Polis represents a real triumph of expert industrial and interaction design at the level of technological geopolitics, these can’t be separated from the
cloud enclaves against which they lean.
31. Amazon
By comparison with Facebook and Apple, Amazon’s model for Cloud Polis emphasizes
an agora of objects rather than of humans, logistical expertise over tactile affect and
self-identity, and white label services instead of brand patriotism. By far the largest
online retailer, it has made post-Fordist supply chain compression and retail distribution chain automation into a long-tail mass medium. Through its gargantuan website
and its network of warehouses and distribution centers, the Amazon platform centralizes connections between producers and retail consumers at a massive scale. The
sum of individual items listed in the cosmic Amazon.com inventory index is measured
in the hundreds of millions and is kept in check by the company’s own proprietary
object identifier, the Amazon Standard Identifier (more in the Address chapter below).
The Amazon Cloud model is based not only on expertise in faster-than-military-grade
point-to-point logistics and mega-retail, but also the linking of these two with algorithmically driven pricing, recommendation, profiling, and proprietary purchase functions like One-Click and Prime. This gives Amazon visibility into small-volume supply
chains similar to Walmart’s into mass-volume merchandise. The results are price constriction, delivery time compression, and a general undermining of brick-and-mortar
retail economics. Of those discussed here, Amazon’s model is the most demonstrative
of how what was once called e-commerce has transformed how goods are made and
consumed, and how spatial and temporal economies of production, habitation, and
labor have been refixed accordingly. But the “flat world” initiated by these logistical
integrations is far flatter for objects than it is for people, as Amazon has orchestrated an
incredibly precise scattering of commodified molecules coming and going.
In his 1950 essay “The Thing,” Heidegger lamented what he saw as the “going” of
the organic, situated thing gathered from natural ingredients and the “coming” of the
technological object, all placeless, anonymous, and cosmopolitan (I do not share his
view on this). Scanning the landscapes of shipping containers, we assume that renewed
philosophical interest in the agency of inanimate objects—the globality of material cultures, object-oriented philosophical speculations, assemblages, and networks—cannot
be coincidental. These are overly timely reactions to an apparent if also unnamed predominance of object flows and freedoms, as supported by planetary-scale computation.
This interest variously valorizes or rejects that predominance and those flows, more or
less uncomfortable with the anti-anthropocentrism that rootless objects suggest and,
as discussed in more detail in the Interfaces chapter, the post-Internet globalization of

132

Cloud Layer

inanimate and animate substances presents a challenge to disturbed everyday sense
of place and agency. For many, logistical distance and nearness bring not systemic
transparency but mystification. Objects somehow appear on the doorstep, their origins
opaque to their consumers and Users. Perhaps, from some vast and distant reservoir of
a Spinozan ursubstance, a pure clay of stuff, commodity form is given to each one of
these iterations, then packed in containers with millions more just like it. When this
mass arrives at the shipping port, that sequence of smaller components assembling
into larger aggregate states is reversed.59 The packed shipping container is opened; pallets are removed, trucked, tracked, broken down into boxes; and then finally a singleUser unit appears for delivery, a pebble peeled off this unseen boulder and delivered to
your porch-become-retail interface.
When you click on the Buy button, you trigger this whole process again. One fewer
unit on the shelf means one more is assembled elsewhere to replace it as “choice” activates the supply chain as surely as turning a key in a car makes it start. Amazon’s is the
state-of-the-art model platform for this Cloud Polis of things. Amazon’s central demands
for that polity’s prototypical future are object logistics, retail compression and virtualization, procedural individuation, as well as third-party hosting, the provision of wholesale
Cloud hosting at global scale. Amazon’s eminent retail position leverages the just-intime global delivery networks born in the 1970s that enabled overnight links between
the East and West coasts of the US through central hubs in the Southeast, namely, UPS
and FedEx.60 Tracking the growth of planetary-scale computation to synchronize and
accelerate flows of data and metadata, these package delivery networks have evolved
from expensive supplementary services for high-priority clients into general platforms
for the distribution of objects to and fro. Their efficiencies threaten federal postal systems, which offer universal service even to remote locations but comparatively slow
delivery options (more on the postal ontology of the state in the Address chapter).
Through megaoutlets like Amazon, these delivery platforms not only grease the flow
of goods from warehouse to shelf, they virtualize the shelf and alter the relative advantages and disadvantages of local businesses. The velocity of object flow tracks to exponential increases in the computational capacity of individual processors, which are also
the switching gateways of real packages coordinated by them in aggregated multiples.
As each switch in the landscape of logistical infrastructures increases in its ability to
route bits, it also increases its ability to route the real objects that those bits represent.
Amazon (and others—e.g., Walmart, Carrefour, Alibaba) aggregate and centralize those
routes, feeding on efficiencies of scale, the competitive supervision of these networks,
and the leverage over smaller actors in the cycle that these both guarantee.
The Amazon model demonstrates (as does Google’s) how the microtargeting of content to individual Users based on previous search-and-click history allows unique terms
of engagement with diverse subpublics without needing to put one User on display

Cloud Layer

133

to the other. This technology of procedural individuation-without-identity is in contrast with Facebook’s, which defines the individuation of the User largely through the
visual display of identity. For Amazon, the long tail is a model of objective tendencies,
not subjectively performed gestures. The platform does not care about your name or
who you really are deep down, but only in the likelihood that the next presentation
of object X, Y, or Z will motivate your One-Clicking and the subsequent activation of
supply chain cascades that ensue. For this, Amazon does not even necessarily have to
provide the User-facing front end for Cloud services. Just as UPS and FedEx moved into
high-margin logistics consulting businesses, Amazon Web Services is a major provider
of large-scale Cloud hosting and e-commerce for third parties (including states and their
intelligence agencies). In addition to finding customers for its suppliers, Amazon also
rents the pick-axes for the Cloud rush. This superterranean platform-of-platforms (from
servers to warehouse to inventory delivery) allows both small and large affiliate actors
to engage multiple overlapping and even opposed publics on the same shared hosting
infrastructures.
As Amazon further shrinks the remote order-delivery cycle from a network of nearby
distribution hubs and subhubs toward the same-day and instantaneous downloadable
delivery of items, the remaining functions of local retail become both more constricted
and more open.61 On the one hand, ever greater supply chain compression may further transform retail space into purely experiential demonstration theaters, designed
to motivate later online purchase, or may push to reprogram them all as publicly accessible storage facilities: a Tesla showroom or Home Depot, and not much in between. In
time, 3D printing and other digital fabrication technologies may accelerate and overpower even this process, as your Kindle evolves from an e-book reader to an e-goods
fabricator key and license library. Perhaps the Amazon model will lead away from
today’s warehouse archipelagos dotting rural landscapes connected by cargo trucks
and toward a denser network of print stations where furniture, electronics, appliances,
clothes, and other products are fabricated on demand for pickup or shuttled to nearby
residences (by drones, maybe—and maybe not). Perhaps the same network would also
reverse the supply chain, providing deep recycling and upcycling of used goods. A
network of Amazon printing stations might not only regurgitate commodities, but also
reabsorb used matter as well, slurping up that universal commodity clay, and closing
the open trash loop of mass consumption by shifting Users away from the redundant
ownership of individual items and toward lighter subscription and service economies.
The impacts of this gray-goo macroeconomics are unknown unknowns: all goods made
free through object torrents, implosion of the demand base, empty factories in China,
shipping ports turned into Museums of Cement, centrally planned provisioning, nanocommunism, nanofeudalism? As ever, platforms at this scale are both cure and poison
at once.

134

Cloud Layer

32. Google
In 2011, in a bid against Apple, Microsoft, and others for a cache of Nortel’s patents,
Google offered what at first seemed like weird, arbitrary sums. It was soon apparent
that these were not random, but represented definite and significant mathematical
strings—for example, Google bid $3.14159 billion, or pi times a billion, for one bundle.
It had bid numbers that were Brun’s constant and the Meissel-Mertens constant, which
relate to prime numbers. One can interpret this as an oblique but emphatic symbolic
statement by Google that the immutable and universal laws of mathematics, which are
by their nature uninterested in the folly of political hierarchies and economic intrigue,
will ultimately win out over the hysterical mere numbers of human counting. Google
may or may not share this view, of course, but none of the other platforms discussed
in this chapter come close to Google in its universal, even cosmic ambition. Not only
does the company express a cosmopolitan mission (at least rhetorically), it does so as
if the company itself were merely the conduit of a deeper force of quantitative reason. The company’s mission statement, “to organize the world’s information and make
it universally accessible and useful,” is in its simplicity about as all-encompassing as
you can get. When everything is information, then organizing the information means
organizing everything. For example, Google recently purchased the smart thermostat
company Nest (as part of a robotics buying spree), and the company still has its license
to sell energy. In the longer term, a Google Energy may be a key player in the retail and
wholesaling of renewables and the management of both consumer and municipalityfacing smart grids. The company sees the pairing of bits and electrons as part of its
vocation in ways that others simply cannot: Google Energy, Google Glass, Google Ideas,
Google Car, Google Robotics, Google Earth. Google Space. Google Time. Google AI.
Google Grossraum. Google Sovereignty, Google World. For the Google platform model
for the Cloud Polis, these are all based on a grand vision encompassing (at least) information cosmopolitanism, search, advertising, physicalized information, and global infrastructure.
Google (and now Alphabet) is a company founded on an algorithm.62 The original PageRank algorithm was Larry Page’s attempt to organize the entire World Wide
Web according to something like the peer citation models that quantify which academic papers are most influential and relevant. This computational meritocracy is in
the service of a universalist mission to not only organize the world’s information but
to “make it accessible and useful.” The most current status report on this mission as
a geopolitical framework is the book The New Digital Age: Reshaping the Future of People, Nations and Business by Google executive chairman Eric Schmidt and former State
Department official, now Google Ideas director, Jared Cohen. The book pledges allegiance to various contemporary truisms regarding the Internet’s ability to flatten and
democratize political systems and to deliver market-friendly civil societies. It argues
that open data flows puncture local superstitions and will eventually sink capricious

Cloud Layer

135

authoritarian ideologies under the weight of the transparency and enlightenment that
they usher in. Partially reminiscent of the Wilsonian doctrines that drew Schmitt’s
disdain, and also of Clintonian versions of the end-of-history thesis, for Schmidt and
Cohen, friction is equated with antiquated self-serving oppression whereas universal
information liquidity is linked with geocultural progress and democracy. Their characterization of Google’s role as neutral platform is often more implied than directly
outlined, and visionary claims for the digital future are made through and on behalf
of the regular people whose lives will be enhanced by the Google platform’s evolution. Today, however, Google is also perceived as too linked to the US federal system,
and both fairly and unfairly is held in suspicion throughout the world, especially in
China and Russia, as a stalking horse for the US State and Defense departments’ security apparatuses.63 Any real informational cosmopolitanism is far less likely to come to
fruition in any way resembling Google’s stated aspirations as long as this is the case.
In his slashing review of the book, Julian Assange characterizes it as “an attempt by
Google to position itself as America’s geopolitical visionary—the one company that
can answer the question, ‘Where should America go?’” While his cynicism about the
chrysalis Google World on tap and what it means for a company hoping to not “be
evil” is shared by many, Assange’s laser focus on the US-centricity of Google overstates
the particular.64 Put plainly, Assange’s single-mindedness about the United States as
the epicenter of hegemony and therefore the key innovator of authoritarian models
(an assertion he had no qualms making from own show on Putin’s RT television channel) is too idiosyncratic and limited a critique. It is informed by an absolutized (and
Oedipalized) metapolitics that crusades for transparency, opacity, and/or privacy as the
guarantors of safety and sovereignty for atomized rational actors, and too often also as
the core or even sole requirements for human social organization. For Assange, Google
equates with sinister schemes of a single state, and according to Schmidt and Cohen’s
book, Google is but a useful and agnostic enabler of the democratic project. What neither Assange nor Google is able to say is that the more disruptive and even likely future
is one in which platforms such as Google undermine the ability of traditional states
to control the evolution of the new Cloud polities, irregular and unrecognizable, that
spring to life and will in time turn on their state hosts.
For their part, Schmidt and Cohen also warn against “Internet balkanization”
whereby authoritarian state actors (China, Russia, Iran, federations of Sunni states,
Texas, and so on) build virtual borders around their citizens, keeping them trapped in
a closed bubble of sanctioned concepts, and sheltered from the enlightening waters
of the global Internet provided by open platforms, such as Google. Under this deglobalization, the cosmopolitan potential of the Google Cloud model would be subverted
and inverted by local “traditional states” jealous of their citizens’ wandering attention. They explain the dynamic of Cloud versus state in the gentlest possible terms for
a Western audience. The negative scenarios drawn include alternative DNS (Domain

136

Cloud Layer

Name System) addressing systems allowing any state bloc to contain its own map of
the online world, separate from others, and in principle to wipe other locations off
their particular map. Such information enclaves, especially those implemented and
enforced by traditional state regimes, are a hovering threat to atmospheric universalism, and so Google now also offers its own Google Public DNS, which allows Users
behind the wall of a closed-off Internet to tunnel through anyway.65 As these arms
races heat up, Schmidt and Cohen speculate about Internet refugees and asylum seekers moving across physical borders, without or without special visas, so that they might
access Cloud systems unavailable from where they escaped. The corollary of this proliferation of walled gardens and online enclaves is what the authors call “virtual states,”
represented by proto-states that hope to realize themselves as distinct communities,
and they discuss the examples of formal online polities for a Kurdish state and an independent Chechnya. But the more interesting Cloud polities are not those that simply
extrude national or ethnic identity online and reestablish borders there, or those that
use online space to make irredentist claims to territorial sovereignty denied them on
the physical ground, but those that develop and form without that geographic and
historical legacy and for whom the Cloud’s own geographic situation is the first basis of
emergent sovereign imaginaries. Cloud “citizenship” is structured around the slippery
semantics of User identification and addressing. While Cloud platforms might support,
subvert, or sidestep the sovereignties of particular state systems, those same systems
may be put to the task of arbitrating some aspect of the final maps of identity and the
portions of political subjectivity that they might still contain. Competing platforms,
which seek to leverage their core control of self-identity economics as the basis of their
platform’s effective autonomy, might be less enthusiastic about that particular arrangement. At the same time, identity services are sure to continue to play a decisive role in
differentiating privacy and publicity, cozily secure for those who can pay, but for those
less fortunate life is lived out in the open, shedding data for whatever may come along
to observe them.
Google’s geopolitical model depends on their core revenue channels, namely search
and advertising. Search is conventionally understood as the ability to enter strings of
human-understandable language into an index and then receive ranked links to “web
pages” correlated to their relevance for Users like you. But search, as an epistemological technology, can and does extend to more esoteric realms, expanding “who” is
searching, the semantics of “a query,” and the uncertain discreteness of “what” can
be searched for in the first place. As computational systems absorb more and more
industrial infrastructure at a finer grain of detail, imbuing tiny components with network addressability, nonhuman Users will make far more queries than those by regular
humans, and by some measures, they already do. Search shifts from a person-looking-for-information business model toward a subsystem component-querying-external-systems mode of infrastructure. Search becomes about machines querying state

Cloud Layer

137

conditions of other machines, and these can include Google hardware such as a car,
which will search or sense their immediate surroundings and are in turn searched by
those same surroundings.66 Perhaps there is no User who can search who cannot also be
searched. As search includes many forms of Cloud-based person-to-machine, machineto-machine, and machine-to-person communication, it may also develop deeper and
more semantically standardized grammars. Many semantic systems would allow a simple query to execute a script or small program that would return much more than a list
of links; “to search” becomes more like programming the search engine and its index
according to User wants and purposes. When nonhuman hardware executes semantically complex query programs, then search becomes a general platform for an autoprogrammatic physical Cloud. Finally, far beyond Web pages, the landscape of what can
be addressed by a given search expands to include any “thing” that can be addressed
with a discrete numerical signifier, whether it resides on a server in a data center or in
the habitats of everyday life. That addressee could be a bit of datum, a physical thing,
a mapped relationship between things in time, tangible or intangible (more on this in
the Address chapter). The future of search involves all these innovations of the who,
how, and what of searching and being searched, and Google’s current eminence in this
space depends on its ability to outpace (or outacquire) competitors in these domains.
Google’s revenue does not come from the direct provision of retail Cloud services,
such as search, but from the monetization of User attention paid to services in the
course of engagement. Its Cloud model economics is based on the successful transformation of the web into a massive peer-to-peer advertising platform, and the transformation of advertising into a meshwork of computationally microtargeted points
and clicks. By the pairing of supplied and demanded attention at the infinitesimal
degrees of individual search results, page views, and keyword bidding, Google absorbs
cognitive capital from the collective intellect of its User population, siphoning value
centripetally and then pushing it back outward.67 Google’s vast suite of Cloud services
costs no money for Users to use, but they are not exactly free; the company generates
far more money in aggregate by optimizing attention and information that it costs
them to provide those services, and in this regard Google’s business is exemplary of
platform surplus value discussed in the second chapter, and of how the platform derives
value proportional to its own use and adoption. Google’s essential techniques for this,
besides the built-in network effect of its vast User population, are the proprietary algorithms that precisely pair bid-on search terms with optimized advertising and results.
Every time anyone makes a search on Google and clicks on a particular result or advertisement, she is also retraining the platform’s algorithmic intelligence, a tiny bit each
time, helping it to make incrementally more precise predictions of User intention, intuition, desire, and demand. Without minimizing the expertise of Google’s scientists and
engineers to actually compose these complex systems, we can also say that Google’s
search and advertising infrastructure draws on the work of its users to optimize which

138

Cloud Layer

search results will best match the inquiries made by future Users and their interests.
Every time we execute a search query, Google is not only working for us; we are also
working for Google. The total value of Google’s costs to provide those services is always
less than the total value of the intellectual and information capital that its User population provides to the platform. The difference between the former and the latter was a
gross profit margin of 62.86% for 2015 as of mid-June, according to Google’s reporting.
Whereas for all advertising economies, the audience is the real product resold by the
minute, impression, or click, for mature platform economies such as Google’s, the User
is the product and the worker cobuilding the platform (of which he or she or it is also a
customer). This would not work if Users themselves did not receive real platform value
from their participation in this particular platform as opposed to others. From the perspective of the individual User, the personal value of information received must be (or
at least seem) greater than value sent, even if at the aggregate level of User populations,
the inverse may be true. At once, Google’s Cloud economics draws on capitalized cognition, networked value production, and incremental value accumulation and reappropriation.68 In this sense, it is not foremost an apparatus of surveillance or control per se
but a medium for the capture and transformation of living, thinking, and knowing into
platform value. The latter is not reducible to the former. Its “organization of the world’s
information” strongly depends on the incorporation of the work done for its global
index by its Users, and the blending of that work into new aggregates, so as to better train that machine’s capacity to simulate, motivate, and mediate Cloud economies
with thought-by-thought, gesture-by-gesture granularity. One wonders what the Soviet
cyberneticians of the 1950s and 1960s, with their plodding ledgers and “gosplans,”
would make of such a system if it were stripped of its patina of American hegemony.
“Information” is not only about the world; it is in the world, and so once Google’s
platform archive has reached a threshold equilibrium, the company’s mission statement suggests that it should retool the world to make it generate more information,
so that the world itself can be better organized. In some cases, making information
physical is indistinguishable from making physical machines more computational; the
impetus for hybridization can begin from either side. In 2013–2014, Google went on
an extraordinary buying spree, acquiring many of the most innovative robotics companies, many working in areas not directly related to the company’s existing services
and offerings. Google’s new zoo of machines represents a diverse range of physical
activities that could be programmed and monitored by its platform; together these
companies make robots that can run, jump, carry heavy things, fly, make things, take
things apart, and manage the temperature of your house based on your daily routines. It is reported that Google’s robotics ventures will be one of the occupants of the
Hangar One megastructure at Moffett Field, leased from NASA’s Ames Research Center
in Mountain View, CA, but with the chief architect of the Android mobile operating
system, Andy Rubin, initially in charge of the project, we surmise that its mission is

Cloud Layer

139

perhaps more to link robots together on a common operating system than to engineer
their bodies. Rubin has since left Google, replaced by James Kuffner, but the longer
term strategy may be in place: organize and make accessible the robotic phylum. Our
anthropocentric predispositions often lead us think of a robot in the singular, as a
synthetic person that contains its program just like a human thinks that it contains a
will and a personality. Platform-based robotics, however, suggest other avenues of evolution. Today, ROS (robot operating system) is one existing platform of tools, libraries,
and frameworks for adding software-based functionality to robots in ways similar to
how one would program a software-only application; however; it cannot match what
something like a robust “Android for robots” could do as part of the Google Cloud
Polis model. Robotic mechanisms at varying scales would not only execute programs,
but could sense, correlate, and report data on their interactions with the world, feeding the platform’s appetite for information to search, organize, and optimize. Each
mechanism would also be in essence another User of the Google platform, and like all
other Users, it would search and be searched, make use of the information that is there,
and generate more information for other Users. Furthermore, as a model User, it is plural; its own intelligence is networked with the platform and with the wider collective
of robotic and human Users with whom it collaborates. Should any one mechanism
encounter something unknown, it could access a live API (application programming
interface) or another more efficient technique and register the intelligence necessary to
make decisions and actions. Over time, as each encounters different things and modifies its programming to accommodate them, two robot mechanisms born of the same
model begin to diverge and even speciate. (More on this in the concluding chapter.) In
the meantime, instead of new forms and behaviors, as platform information becomes
more physical, its initial accomplishments may to “roboticize” machines, processes,
techniques, behaviors, and systems as we already find them. The results are not unlike
skeuomorphic interface designs where digital icons are made to resemble everyday
objects and so allegorize how human Users (and designers) understand their machine’s
functions to work. It will take some time for platform robotics to invent new infrastructural systems that are unique to how its capacities can be designed instead of merely
automating what already exists.
Toward this, the ambition of Google’s Cloud Polis model already extends into the
design and deployment of global infrastructures, and this interest is not a recent addition to the company’s founding vision, but in many ways precedes it. When Larry Page
was a student at the University of Michigan, he was fascinated with the idea of an Ann
Arbor monorail that would make local transportation more efficient. Google’s interest in transportation-as-platform extends, as discussed, into the Google driverless car
project, now a focus of Sergey Brin’s interest and attention (more on these in the User
chapter). One corollary of governing the Cloud as a global infrastructure for the integration of multiple economies under the rubric of rationalized information is a reframing

140

Cloud Layer

of existing infrastructures as local instances for the application of a new information
systems engineering program. Some of these (e.g., mass transportation, energy distribution, economic identity, cartography, banking) developed during the industrial era as
platform mechanisms for large-scale states that may have been, at that time, among
the only actors with sufficient capacity to deploy and defend these acts of sovereign
inscription at continental scale. For better or worse, platforms such as Google may be
positioned to offer parallel innovation of these same inscriptions now as private Cloudbased services. In that the ongoing effective sovereignty of modern states was to a
degree underwritten by their management of local sections of global infrastructure, the
realization of viable alternatives to this guarantee, now as core functions of The Stack,
further complicates the boundaries between platform as state and state as platform.
Perhaps the most fundamental of these, however, will prove to be energy and the
Cloud layer’s governance of the Earth layer of The Stack. To return to the earlier figure
of a remote sea-based data center, we can say that is not likely that Google’s research
exploration of this solution is meant as an experiment with the liquid boundaries of
Cloud jurisdiction. The company is not, I assume, looking at this particular project
as a way to directly challenge state jurisdiction altogether. In fact, Google’s fortune
is probably more suited not to secession from state platform space, but to strategic
interweaving with states (plural) and to an incremental assumption of traditional functions of the state, as they themselves pivot to the Cloud. However, taken as a design
fiction (albeit one under Google’s patent protection), the oceanic data center cannot
but inspire ideas about new geographies. As indicated, Google’s direct interest in such a
system is driven by the pursuit of energy efficiencies and how to scale a planetary Cloud
without a minimum of carbon- and dollar-intensive electrons. Google already has a
subsidiary, Google Energy, that allows it to directly buy and sell federally regulated
wholesale electricity, allowing the company to purchase directly from independent
producers bypassing local utilities, and then selling excess energy back to the grid.69 It
is not difficult to imagine how a User-facing alternate version of Google Energy could
become both major smart grid concern and provider of Google-branded or Googleproduced energy, municipal and personal metering services, grid platform software, or
a business-to-business and business-to-customer customer/User relationship management systems. In principle, that combined energy-data platform could make (some)
international carbon mitigation agreements more enforceable precisely because states
would not have to agree among each other as to how to monitor and measure the flows.
Could Google (and corollaries in other parts of the world) just do this on its own and
report it? Would state security hacking of energy-data routers and sensors only extend
the old realpolitik into the realm of networked electrons? Still, as discussed in the Earth
chapter, the membrane between an energy grid that powers the Cloud and the Cloud as
a grid that mediates both bits and electrons at once is potentially porous at some key
points. Google’s energy ventures may suggest a model for the Cloud Polis for which the

Cloud Layer

141

provision of both of these at once is a compound service and system.70 The interface of
two existing systems, an information network and an energy network, may combine to
produce a third thing: an energy Cloud drawn by a mixture of urban and regional infrastructures, networked production and storage centers, and on-demand utility nodes.
Just as the production and management of infrastructure cohered publics for industrial
states, the same may be true for the organization of new publics in their image of the
platforms that come to manage them. If so, Google might depoliticize energy in some
ways and radically politicize it in others. Recall that the political guarantee of a secure
energy source (food) was and is a building block of archaic political loyalty, and is continued by states that did and do provide electricity as a public utility. Regardless of any
benefits, the rendering of human-usable electrons according to the logics of platform
surplus value is also certain to be attached to at least a few calamities. Nevertheless, as
the geopolitics of climate change–related energy production and consumption effects
looms larger, the questions of energy provision, dissemination, transparency, monitoring, alliance, and allegiance will (as discussed in the Earth chapter) drive realignments
of jurisdictional loyalties around common predicaments, whether we prefer them to
do so or not. Going forward, there is no Earth layer without the Cloud layer, and vice
versa. Because energy is so essential and its calculative rationalization so attractive, it
may drive the determining variables—its planetary limits, its antagonistic territories,
its reserve currencies, and its included and excluded populations of Users—not just for
Google’s model of the Cloud Polis, but for the political geographic alignments of the
entire Stack.
33. Future Cloud Polis and Platforms
The geopolitical design question for the Cloud layer of The Stack circulates around
what forms different Cloud polities will take in the near future and how they will draw
on alternative organizational logics in their emergence. To diagram this, it is tempting to extrapolate from existing models and to inflate and linearize their exponential
development. Surely to varying degrees the models described above, as abstracted from
Facebook, Apple, Amazon, and Google, will persist, normalize, expand, and recombine
in some linear fashion. But in their recombinations and in the gaps and failures, unexpected and perhaps unlikable developments are certain to shift the terms by which
such models mediate power. In the span of a generation, we may be living with an
ecology of competing platforms for which the models that differentiate today’s players
are mixed differently along with new unknown functions. Only for this reason, and
not for making futurist predictions about companies or stocks, the models of the current mix are a good starting point from which to sketch what might arrange alternative
Cloud polities. Each of the limited sovereignties that a platform enjoys over a specific
domain can be recombined. For example, instead of today’s division of organizational

142

Cloud Layer

acumen as drawn above, perhaps some new Cloud platform will be based on a combination of aspects drawn from Facebook, Amazon, Apple, and Google at once. Perhaps one
is based on individuation and display, App ecology, object logistics, and global infrastructure.
Perhaps another instead draws on visual communication, hardware and physical touch,
third-party cloud services, and search, while a third is based on fabricated currencies, enclave
aesthetics, retail virtualization and compression, and cloud-based robotics. To date, the current major platforms have evolved as expressions of specific but not inevitable strategic
decisions. There is no reason to assume that the ecology of platforms must be as it
is, and very different arrangements are not only possible but inevitable. Today’s key
Cloud platforms might evolve in the direction of these prototypical mutations, while
new platforms consolidate and bifurcate, others emerge from bits and pieces of incomplete smaller players, and still others remain resolutely partial and interstitial, carving
unrecognized parcels from the overlaps. It would be worthwhile to formally outline
full scenarios for each set of possible recombinations from existing platforms (several
others—e.g., Walmart, Alibaba, General Electric, Samsung, Unilever, Siemens, Toyota—
could be included here) formalizing the gaps, unexpected synergies and conflicts, and
the different agendas that drive them to cohere and diverge. The resulting diagram of
this menagerie of chimeric Cloud platforms will likely include some creatures that will
in time appear for real and stalk the Earth.
If the basic ingredients from which those might be combined to develop global
proto-state platforms seem dangerously inadequate then my point about the necessity
of tuning our design attention here has been made. That designable future of Cloud
Polis will not evolve on its own, as if determined by some autonomous space of calculative variables. It will appear in coevolution, sometimes complementary and sometimes
violent, with other existing modes of political imagination and organization, including
the Westphalian state and its inept adaption to global ecological governance. This is
complicated by how the future of the state will also develop through its incorporation
of the Cloud as its own field of vision, domain, and jurisdiction, in parallel with the
Cloud further incorporating state functions. What, if anything, finally grounds these
counterclaims? In one sense, the practical locus of governmental control is over the
capacity to structure, police, and, especially, tax flows: flows of people, money, data,
energy. Through the control of the interfaces of input and output, be that a port city, a
great firewall, or a superjurisdictional seizure, the taxation of flows is both the means
by which states execute the right to exact capital and the result of sovereignty. In turn,
that sovereignty over flows of value is translated into the right to issue standard guaranteed currencies, through which those flows are measured and which symbolize the
sovereignty that legitimizes that claim in the first place. Money is also a way to identify the content of flows through abstracted equivalencies and, through the Address
layer, to enforce territorial claims over identification itself. But as Cloud platforms
have perhaps more direct means to validate them, competing claims for unforceable

Cloud Layer

143

identifications of taxable flows may be where critical conflicts for the coevolutions of
Cloud governance also rest.
Today some states seek to reconcretize their authority over the otherwise untaxed
flows of value through the Cloud and have turned to forums like the UN International
Communications Union to redefine global governance of the Cloud accordingly.71
Some simply want more global representation in standards and policy bodies dominated by the United States, other want to meter and tax Google for sending data
over their lines, others to build tighter control systems into the apparatus making it
easier for them to police troublemakers, and others even seek to shift the assignment
of neutral infrastructural processes, such as the allocation of IP addresses, to individual
nation-states for reasons that are unclear even to them.72 Instead of resolving the contradictions posed by the sovereign Cloud platforms by putting everything back in the
bottle of the state’s borders, some propositions would immediately exacerbate pockets
of friction by fraying points of mutual incompatibility toward kaleidoscopic delirium
and structural vacuum. A further decentralization of Internet governance is not a bad
idea in itself, but basing governance instead on the privileges of local fiefdoms and
seizures, and on making blunt old-school patriarchal authoritarianism more convenient, is in fact a very bad idea. The Stack suggests no teleology or necessary outcome,
and the specter of Cloud feudalism becoming the normal twenty-first-century macroeconomics is a real possibility, but the state pushback against today’s version of planetary-scale computation should not be seen as extrinsic, or even contradictory, to the
logics of Stack geopolitics. As already suggested, a political and cultural momentum
toward generalized secession, not one-worldism, seems to drive what we might see as the
nomos of the Cloud. As a response to the uncertainties of the Cloud, polities consolidate
into enclaves, new and old. Some of these are based on gestures like a reinscription
of original lines of ethnic division and self-location, and some are based on platform
sovereignties provided or demanded by regular participation in and identification with
particular Cloud services, and some are based on both at once. Libertarian dreams of
atomic secession and Eurasianist dreams of atavistic empire are two sides of the same
coin.73 Just as fundamentalism is a persistent symptom of globalization, sometimes
conservative localism is a symptom of planetary systemization; as such, it succeeds less
as countermeasure against hegemony than as a culture laying siege to itself.
At some point, these conflicts may resolve into stable, if also contradictory, geopolitical architectures. Cloud Polis models may recognize some consensus(es) for the superimposition of one sovereignty on the other, sharing the same spot on alternative maps.
Or perhaps, even if without mutual recognition, the “Google” and “China” models of
Cloud Polis, for example, may still coexist in some as-yet-undetermined modus vivendi,
the terms of which change as quickly as unintended effects of technical maneuvers
ripple back and forth through their planes of jurisdiction. But even so, we expect that
the map that is supposed to mark the sites of disputation between the two would itself

144

Cloud Layer

be disputed. The two may weigh the scale of a demilitarized zone very differently,
and the drawing of a real line on the ground may or may not be registered as formal
demarcation regardless of how much it might actually structure actual flows. Any functional monopoly over the crucial symbolic lexicon of geography structures the kind of
economics that can play out on it, and the Google Maps Nicaragua–Costa Rica conflict
is telling, if only as a geopolitical allegory, of a novel shift between states and cloud
platforms in establishing functional authority over that geographic symbolization. But
China is no Costa Rica, and as India, Japan, and every other neighbor can attest, it is
not shy about redrawing its own version of territorial reality according to an ambitious
geographic self-image. Google’s ultimate geographic strategy is less obvious and strategically articulated; indeed, it neither needs to be nor should be. Instead of claiming
and occupying an exclusive sovereign territory, Google absorbs existing spaces into its
purview by capturing and consolidating images of all territory at various scales, from
street to satellite and back, and rendering them into the platform’s comprehensive
interface of rationalized space. Territory absorbed by Google is not one loop among
others on a zero-sum horizontal plane, but a universal layer beneath the particular
claims of any one entity in a thickened geographical stack. Google’s mapping ambition therefore is foundational and inclusive of territory-in-total, and thereby it may be
seen as interfering with an absolute last instance of sovereign identification that states
might otherwise enjoy. Its descriptive reason extends beyond land masses, even deep
into the Amazon river basin to oceanic underwater canyons, and beyond the planet,
including Mars and Earth’s moon, and offering them up through its own versions of
the Blue Marble Earth, now interfacial regimes for the Google Earth publics. Does the
Cloud Polis model suggested by Google’s geographic reach recast political territory in
a recognizable way, and if so, where are its binding limits? Are they established by the
interfaces between Google and the state, or do they extend “beyond the line”? On the
one hand, the superterranean spaces of the Cloud layer are a geometric mismatch with
political geography as conventionally understood, but they are also coterminous with a
return and ascendance of new city-state networks, and so with the fissiparous unbinding of one-world architectures comes a general resorting of mobile subjects into new
infrastructural cosmopolities, enclaves, and exclaves, including ancient nationalisms
and futuristic alliances.74
Just as the overlaid geographies of the Cloud layer are generative of its most interesting future developments (and this geometric dissensus should be recognized as such),
the same superimpositions will give structure to the pathways and limits of our own
individual lives. In relation to software and sovereignty, each person, each plot of
land, each addressable object, will be claimed by multiple incompatible jurisdictional
authorities at the same time. Each such authority is in its way complete and “universal”
within the limited domain that it can see and move, even if it is invisible to the others. The management of this multiplicity therefore works not in spite of overlapping

Cloud Layer

145

claims, but because of their claims of exclusivity. We will see that finally, it is the
mutual exclusivity and closure between delimited sovereign spaces that allows multiple universal claims to coexist in different dimensions, even as they claim the same person or site as a subject. Perhaps, as we will discuss in the following chapters, the most
critical secondary accidents of the Cloud layer are those that automate the architecture
of exclusion between territorial planes according to violent hierarchies of absorption
and extraction. It may also be our hope, however, that the same operations bring with
them their own generative accidents, ones that introduce unexpected and uncontrollable forms of spatial access and practical mobility for those otherwise curtailed by its
intended predicaments. That is, the flip side of producing platform User identity when
none is wanted is that it is also produced for Users regardless of how other systems
may otherwise try to exclude them. By their normalization of exceptional reversibility,
urban and infrastructural scale interfaces that once kept them out now let them in,
automating sovereignty where states had decided alienation. To consider this in more
detail, we’ll have to examine how the Cloud drives and animates the next layer up in
The Stack, the one inside of which we all live: the City layer.

City Layer

No one, today, can know what the city of tomorrow will be. One part of the semantic wealth
which belonged to it in the past …, it will lose that, certainly. ... The creative and formative role
of the city will be taken charge of by other communications systems ... , perhaps ... television,
radio, their vocabulary and syntax, consciously and deliberately.
—Jean-Luc Godard, Deux ou trois choses que je sais d’elle1
The inhabitants [of Ersilia)] stretch strings from the corners of the houses, white or black or gray
or black-and-white according to whether they mark a relationship of blood, of trade, authority,
agency. When the strings become so numerous that you can no longer pass among them, the
inhabitants leave: the houses are dismantled; only the strings and their supports remain. From a
mountainside, camping with their household goods, Ersilia’s refugees look at the labyrinth of
taut strings and poles that rise in the plain. That is the city of Ersilia still, and they are nothing.
They rebuild Ersilia elsewhere. They weave a similar pattern of strings which they would like to
be more complex and at the same time more regular than the other. Then they abandon it and
take themselves and their houses still farther away. Thus, when traveling in the territory of Ersilia,
you come upon the ruins of abandoned cities, without the walls which do not last, without
the bones of the dead which the wind rolls away: spiderwebs of intricate relationships seeking
a form.
—Italo Calvino, Invisible Cities2
It is not the line that is between two points, but the point that is the intersection of many lines.
—Gilles Deleuze, Pourparlers3

Whenever I hear the term smart cities, I reflexively think of Jacques Tati’s satires on the
follies of automated modern architecture. However dark the humor, for master-controlled megacities and stale visions of bland efficiency, mega-hijinks are sure to follow.
The poverty of off-the-shelf smart city strategies is all the more distressing given how
important the intelligent composition of computational systems at urban scale actually is, especially for new platform sovereignties. Instead, however, if we view these
supposedly futuristic digital technologies in relation to more primordial relationships

148

City Layer

with territory, we may conclude that our meandering, rootless itinerancy through the
surpriseless pathways of junkspace, gripping our mobile Cloud platform tethers (aka
“phones” and tablets and so on) scanning, sorting, poking, and choosing as we go,
is a far less modern way of being urban than we assume.4 Humans, as a species, have
physically evolved very little in the last hundred thousand years, and barely at all
since the appearance of writing. Our bodies’ own sensory media are the same as those
that allowed our ancestors to survive the predatory rhythms of the primal savanna,
and in the City’s landscapes of information production and reception, similar rhythms
persist, now triangulated with new remote communication channels and various
forms of augmented cognition. Perhaps we have tuned these rhythms so that they
can resonate with new tools as much as we have tuned our tools to them. As Sanford
Kwinter wrote,
The contemporary “mediascape” has given such primacy of place to communication that it has
transformed it into substance itself, the very material of which we, and our world, are made.
Yet all biological substance is founded on signaling, from the first single-cell organisms nearly 3
billion years ago to the most sophisticated forms of human social life today. There is no family
of animal that is not defined by its capacities for signaling and no ecological niche that is not
defined by the infrastructure that supports this signaling. When the human line broke off from its
ape ancestors it was a result of a new capacity for communication (a new hand-eye-brain-mouth
machine) and the rise of a new signaling niche in the environment to be filled (the long distance
savannah).5

Architecture at landscape scale, whether as continuous networked urban fabrics or
as withdrawn megastructure, is a particularly important communications infrastructure, in harmony or dissonance with those tunings and countertunings of tools and
perception. In this guise, The Stack enrolls the city as a discrete layer within its larger
sum by the binding of sensation and scale with enclosure and envelope and by pairing the tactility of the virtual with the effervescence of the monumental. As such,
architecture itself serves as both a compositional model for stacks and stacking and
as the tangible infrastructure for its manifestation as cities. While it captures humans
and consoles them within walls, it also provides boulevards of escape toward other
urban interiors, and at least in this way, the City layer of The Stack does not enforce
dichotomies between urbanisms of enclosure and urbanisms of mobility as much as it
combines them. One may turn into the other at any moment. For this project, the City
layer’s basic building unit is the interfacial partition, the physical or virtual boundary
that is made systematically reversible by the situation of its functions within larger
computational systems. As we’ll see, it opens up and closes off urban spaces to different
Users in different ways, allowing different City morphologies for some than it does for
others, and in doing so, it generates and automates visceral first-person experiences of
platform sovereignty, whether invited to do so or not.

City Layer

149

34. Reversible Grids
Along with policing reversible partitions, the City also situates signposts and landmarks around which roving bodies might orient their passing. In many respects, for
Stack urbanism, mobilization precedes and supersedes settlement. Instead of housing
massive inert populations, the City layer is perhaps foremost a platform for sorting
Users in transit, who in turn reprogram the urban platform, and through it re-sort
one another. Consider, by way of analogy and allegory, the excavations beginning in
1994 that unearthed the Göbekli Tepe temple near Sanliurfa, Turkey, among the oldest
human-made places of worship ever found to date. The dig’s stratified layers, one upon
another, were set over centuries. The earliest layers date to 9000 B.C.E., the dawn of
the Holocene era a staggering 7,000 years before the Great Pyramids, more than 6,000
years before Stonehenge first took shape, and 5,000 years before the first proto-states
emerged in the Nile and Indus valleys. The temple predates not only formal agriculture
but large-scale human settlement, and it is thought that it was a site of worship for
numerous hunter-gatherer groups within a roughly hundred-mile radius. The discovery is obviously significant for Neolithic anthropology and has challenged some presumptions about the social and technological capacities of preagricultural societies. For
our purposes, this temple as primal scene not only underscores the foundational role
of “theology” in the centralization of symbolic interfacial authority well in advance of
the proto-state, but also for its demonstration of the essential importance of geography,
and geo-graphy, or “writing on the Earth.” We can imagine (perhaps naively) that for
those following game and gathering food, the direction of Göbekli Tepe, this ancient
megastructure, may have been a guiding vector around which unpredictable landscapes
were measured. Perhaps its collection of animal images served as an index of possible
encounters, its funeral rituals as interfaces to the mysteries of life, and the imagined
possibility of triumph in or over death. For unknown reasons, at the beginning of the
eighth millennium B.C.E., the entire temple system was deliberately buried under 500
cubic meters of soil, preserving it until its discovery in the 1990s. The temple’s establishment and thousand-year career as a homing figure orienting the movements of
groups in motion, by proximity, distance, access, and reference, marks an inception of
landscape geography as an interface to the world as it is moved through.
Zipping back to the present, the City layer may be seen not only as enveloping
space into fields of control, but also a return to these elemental functions of passage,
direction, and narration. The modern urban surface is striated by regularized voids
that provide self-directed passage from one enclosure to the next; we call some of
those voids “streets” and some of those enclosures “blocks,” and we call the generative
platform striation “the grid.” The grid serves the dual purpose of enclosure and escape
noted above. At once, it subdivides urban space into geometric units, each bound by

150

City Layer

legal and physical membranes, and each also situated along the shore of avenues of
linear flight toward other cities over the horizon. The City layer is filled with interfaces shifting between acceleration and enclosure, of both physical objects coursing
through congested logistical routes and also data packets shuttled or throttled through
glass wire and ambient electromagnetic fields. The urban-scale interweaving of both
grids, one literally concrete and the other more delicate if no less heavy, binds the
mysteries of our own temples to the spatial interfaces that turn sites into places. With
Cloud-devices pointing the way and Apps at hand (or Apps as hand, as discussed in
the Interfaces chapter), we hunt for and find our modern itineraries, gather food, tabulate risks, mark passage, manage personal economies of sovereignty and alterity, and
make tribute to the cycles of synthetic time and governance that give shape to the
landscape.6
The parabolistic history above dramatizes how the City layer also unwinds the
well-worn distinction between two ideal cities (reminiscent of Schmitt’s land versus sea): one is a city of partitions, permanent centers, and enveloped populations,
and the other a city of movement expressed through nomadic landscapes, shifting
perspectives, and impermanent networks. For the latter City, the line is an angle of
flight, a vector and trajectory. For the former, as it is for Schmitt, the line fixes and
differentiates between inside and outside, a distinct boundary membrane that holds
together a contiguous polity under voluntary siege, enforcing and naturalizing that
polity’s lived experience of place. But just as any line is itself reversible (any outside
also an inside), these two urban careers of the line are themselves equally as reversible. For the grid, both the line of absolute passage and the line of absolute partition
become in practice a means for the expression of the other. Like the young girl–old
woman optical illusion, the figure-ground prominence of the inside versus the outside and the grounded versus the mobile flips between one ideal resolution and the
other, oscillating wildly and permanently. Its reversibility may be depicted in several
other ways too. It could be a Euclidean grid of points specified on a plane, separated
by equal distances in the crisscrossing of perpendicular lines, or the grid could just
as well be the irregular thistle of pedestrian drifts, switched packets, infinitesimally
granular addressees, unexpected sea sludge (and for the City layer, one may be the
precondition of the other).
Like any other platform, the urban grid is both descriptive and generative. It both
draws a map of its own host situation, providing by its rigidity and predictability both
the four-squared coordinates that resolve City blocks and the open channels of circulation around them, making that land legible and available to exogenous agents. In
anticipation of how such grids can link cities to other structures of vastly different
scales, architecture has anticipated and modeled these sorts of reversible territory and
topos in many different ways. For example, around the time of the Apollo 8 “Earthrise”
photograph, the Italian architects Archizoom, led by Andrea Branzi, were interested

City Layer

151

in considering an image of the city “in exclusively quantitative terms, eliminating the
qualitative question from the debate.” No-Stop City, their most recognized experiment
toward a “city without architecture,” is organized primarily through “systems of electronic instruments, products, information, and ... componential interior[s].” The dominant figure for the project is the minimal inspiration of the line, but less the line of
primordial graphical marking than the line that emerges in the normalized repetition
of instances into a nodal grid (or in the tonal line that resolves and dissolves in the
score of minimalist musical composition or in the arc of a linear statistical tendency,
for example). Their abstractions required no fancy computation; rather, the project
featured intensely reductive urban grid plans composed partially on typewriters, with
periods and commas for nodes and zeros and dashes overlaying these to create formal
fields. Later, several mirror box installations presented fleshed-out models infinitely
reflected on all sides to generate a similar infinite horizon of the same, reducing all
objects within the geometry to recombinant instances of graphed information. Branzi
writes that No-Stop City represents a city that is an “apparently hyper-expressive reality but that is, actually substantially catatonic because it is the result of the infinite
repetition of an alienating political system without density.”7 For this, the city equals
the world, and the world is rendered as a conjunctive grid wrapping a closed informational array within the arrangements of urban totality.8 One price of this totality is, for
some, a “disappearance of the outside,” as there is nowhere to escape if everywhere is
already gridded.9 What remains, however, is less an architecture of qualitative symbolization than a spatial politics of addition and subtraction standing in for appearance
and disappearance. For this, there is always more than one totality and more than one
geography employed, and within the informational geodesies evoked by No-Stop City,
the symbolic depth of cities doesn’t disappear so much as it itself becomes an interface
to and for these totalities. Today the globalization of urban geography engenders a
standardized fabric of flows, radically consolidating nodes into a more centralized and
hierarchical matrix of continental interfaces, but some objects in motion are all the
more free for it. Others are on lockdown, and some switch back and forth on the fly,
both fast and fastened down. In other words, just as for hunters and gatherers, platform
sovereignty is guaranteed more by what it does and where it does it than by what it is
and who it does it to.
35. City as Layer
Now that humans are a majority urban species, it is time to reevaluate what real, finalinstance sovereignties can be derived from a city’s (or all cities’) surfaces and interfaces.
To do so means to situate the City as an interdependent layer within The Stack, and
thereby the management of urban networks within global information and energy
Clouds. These infrastructures produce the fragments from which platform sovereignty

152

City Layer

is identified, codified, and enforced across scales, from the intrapersonal to the interfacial and the transcontinental. In contrast to conceptions of the political as a discursive
realm transcendent of the physical urban polis itself, platform sovereignties emerge
less through legislative birth canals than through the irregular but consistent access
to public and private hardware. The layer is not encapsulated by legal boundaries but
is spread throughout a global composite City for which any one metropolis is a localized instance of global economies of mobilization and partition. That composite is
ultimately built not only of many different cities, but also grids of optical networks
for photon exchange, energy grids for electron exchange, and concrete grids of object
placement and displacement, which together link city clusters into geographical hierarchies. Any one grid situates actors according to its particular matrices, its own history,
momentum, alliances, contradictions, and the overlapping of two grids might work to
multiply those situations or at times to stereoscopically resolve them into one. (This
is discussed further in the User chapter.) As part of the City layer in The Stack, each of
these grids might be activated individually; more likely, they are combined by some
functional equivalence whereby the Cloud layer below and the Address layer above
connect to the grids in ways that are agnostic as to unique relative durability, history,
or character of each. That is, within The Stack, glass, steel, power, and data (and their
grids) may all look the same to the layers above and below. At the same time, more
specific User relations are arranged by any of the interfacial surfaces of the urban fabric (not only buildings and roads, but also those energy, hydration and data grids),
all of which prioritize differently how a city is open or closed to different people and
purposes. The reversibility of platform sovereignties will often play out through the
computational automation of interfaces into and out of these grids.
From these, larval proto-citizenships are derived not just from formal borders and
envelopes but also from the aggregate and crisscrossing steel-energy-information envelopes. As we all share some relationship to these composite envelopes, by using them
and by being used by them, that commonality coheres and automates User positions
in relation to one another. The road makes us all drivers, the fiber cable line makes us
all callers, and the City layer makes us all inhabitants of a composite urban territory. It
suggests that any one of us is (or could be, or should be) less a political subject of this
one city—London, Mumbai, Shanghai—but of the City, of the globally uneven mesh of
amalgamated infrastructures and delaminated jurisdictions. As for humans, our shared
but unequal relationships to this aggregate metaurban layer of The Stack also means
that political subjectivity is resolved variously for the “User” of energy, information,
or land. Different Users of the City layer are curtailed toward different outcomes, even
if the calculative terms of resolution are common. An individual User’s value, profile,
and footprint are sorted within this consolidated index, fixing the City layer’s control
program, as much as terms of a common access and rights of inhabitation and mobility throughout the layer’s wider expanse. The program of capture within the envelopes

City Layer

153

of a given city is always as real as the prospects of flight, but neither is guaranteed.
For both of these, residential jurisdiction of a single city may be only one moment
within the arc of a larger itinerary. Any one of us might only be passing through for a
short time (on tourist or worker visas) or credentialized as formal citizens or restrained
from leaving (refugee camps, prison cities, factory towns) or employed to drift across
urban infrastructural polis (legally or not). Each of us passes from one relative state of
motility to another, day by day or lifetime by lifetime. We are situated in motion, both
inside generic cities, modeled on airports, translating less and less between increasingly
homogeneous places, and also in the heterodoxy of urbanity as globality for which interlocking networks of passage are leveraged to support mutually reinforcing rhythms of
spatial consumption. Still the platform sovereignties that emerge in the technical relations of this composite urbanity are at best contradictory. As for any grid, the reversible
interfacial surface of the urban fabric can produce a durable User subject because it
also by definition is a potential technology of capture and control. Part of the design
brief for The Stack is to disseminate a repertoire of accidents that might frustrate the
more unwanted forms of centripetal incarceration. The ultimate challenge for this is to
conjure alien genres of urbanization from the bounded universality of the generic User
subject position: not an undead Kantian cosmopolitanism but a geopolitical hypermaterialism for which the “right to the city,” and therefore to The Stack, is an essential
suffrage of all meaningful Users, human and otherwise.10
This is possible (or would be possible) only to the extent that the multiple grids of
the City layer are also interfaces to other layers of The Stack. The Earth layer provides,
for example, the incredible energy necessary to feed the physical appetites of the City
layer’s composite urbanism. Its epidermal imperative for seeing and sensing is not only
a substrate to the City layer; it also becomes an operative logic of interfacial control and
composition (more on this below). The Cloud layer provides the generative and reactive
ambient supercomputing that makes urban envelopes and Interfaces active and brings
them into other formal and informal political geographic dramas. While the Cloud may
see urban nodes and fabrics as like any other material for computational expression,
its main switches are themselves gathered into tight rings of intensive transcontinental
hubs, centralizing bandwidth economies into a specific few cellular cities. Away from
those bandwidth capitals, smaller Cloud data centers, assembly factories, fulfillment
centers, call centers, and shipping ports dot more remote geographies and gather itinerant laborers into their midst (or, alternatively, protect themselves against all human
contact). In special cases, Cloud platforms design their own architectural footprints by
gathering their higher-level cognitive-managerial functions into megastructural corporate headquarters, often city-scale buildings with backs turned on their immediate
location (more on these below). Just above the City layer in The Stack, the Address
layer provides network presence for any “thing” within the urban landscape and for
the potential of communication among them. Unlike transnational postal systems,

154

City Layer

this layer doesn’t address sites based on their adjacent positions on the Earth’s surface,
and unlike the formal addressing of parties by a modern legal system, it is available
to potential addressees at very different spatial or temporal scales and even degrees
of physicality and abstraction. The territories of addressed instances within the larger
expanse of the City layer are named, organized, and made coherent and meaningful
by the Interfaces that turn maps of addressable options into practical instruments. For
the User, these maps cohere the range of possible interactions and transactions not
only with the City layer, but also with the Cloud and Earth layers as mediated through
it; Interfaces provide a channel for the User to model and monitor his or her own position within the range that they describe. Furthermore, The Stack is not only mediated
through the City layer; the entire apparatus also expresses itself at the scale of the city
and the built environment, and it does so in sometimes contradictory ways, characterized as much by centralization (e.g., the continental consolidation of key bandwidth channels into meganodes and megacities) and decentralization (e.g., the global
predominance of increasingly powerful mobile handsets as an essential provision for
everyday urban life).11
Below we examine several ways that The Stack is grounded at the City layer, from
the scale of global networks to that of the individual envelope, and back again. We
will see that this integration of one into the other looks less like Leon Battista Alberti’s
organismic city, all parts fitting into natural wholes, than gory multispecies nested
parasitism, one organism living inside another, itself perhaps living inside yet another,
and shuttling energy in and out, through skins and interfaces. For this figure, the City
layer is an urbanism of catalytic digestion more than settled homeostasis; its appetites
are computational but no less violent for it. The Stack is also expressed in City versus
City remote warfare, as dramatized by the launching of the Stuxnet virus into Iranian
nuclear facilities (perhaps physically installed there by hand, perhaps inadvertently
downloaded), where the software took hold of specific centrifuges and tricked them
into malfunctioning but reporting themselves as fully operational.12 This sort of weaponized transurban code is not so unlike a parasitoid fungus, Orphiocordyceps unilateralis,
for example, which infects the brain of a species of ant and directs its zombie to crawl
to the precise height in the jungle canopy suitable by temperature and humidity for the
fungus to fully spore and where the ant husk becomes a factory for the production of
more fungus. Such is the model infrastructural information warfare of microorganisms,
insects, mobile software, and megacities.13
At landscape scales, The Stack supports the consolidation of bandwidth infrastructure into continental nodes as well as the design of massively integrated architectural
forms and programs, encapsulated into architectural megastructures visible from a now
primary satellite perspective: buildings at Stack scale. These megastructures may be
there to organize human habitation or object flow (e.g., corporate campuses, airports,
warehouses), but in many cases, the design problems are increasingly similar to one

City Layer

155

another. The end result is not so much a neutralization of placefulness but rather a
monumental (or antimonumental) hyperinscription, a total architecture withdrawn
from the public city and bound by its own structural borders, gates, walls, and skins,
gardens, introverted from its immediate environment so as better to connect to external
planetary economies on its own terms. Enclaves inside of enclaves digest one another
all the way down. For these megastructures, spatial integration is defined in the paired
tongues of experience and logistics, and realized by folding their urban functions under
a single roof and programming them (attempting to at least) as a single architectural
system, as a self-binding and homogeneous geodetic datum. Some of the most dramatic examples are, not surprisingly, the headquarters of Cloud platforms themselves.
But like the Sith from Star Wars, megastructures always come in pairs: their purification
of program from immediate urban situation and withdrawal into formal singularity
is always necessarily and irreducibly dependent on a doppelganger megastructure (or
more than one) somewhere else.
36. Exposure and Control
Touchpoint by touchpoint, the City layer is perhaps where the birth pangs of Stack geopolitics are felt most viscerally. The arrival of any political constitution is accompanied
by a corresponding foundational violence, and this is no less true of planetary computation and the jurisdictions emerging in its interfacial networks. But unlike modern
political states that may have exploded into being by the breaching or establishment
of specific symbolic centers, the constitutional violence of planetary computation’s
platform sovereignties occurs at the surface of the entire city, in and on every object
seemingly all at once, as ubiquitous and convergent as it is partial and partitional. The
City layer rests on residue of this violence, so where into its shallow surfaces can we
dig? The urban interface was not always conceptualized in terms of its manifest spatial,
political performance, but two essays, written in the Paleolithic years of the digital era,
still clarify some of what is at stake for the City layer in particular. First, Virilio’s essay,
“The Overexposed City” (1985), synthesizes many of his ideas on the mediatization
of the city by focusing on the airport, as both a security environment and a model for
the city’s compression through command, communication, speed, and inertia. Long
ago, the ceremonial interface to a city may have been a gate or a bridge, which, when
closed, also shut off the city from the movement of goods, people, ideas, microbes,
and more. These orifices between city and periphery were where the martial risk and
complexity of contact were modulated, but now the airport is that interface into the
city and to the nation-state, regardless of the global point of departure, and regardless
of how close the airport is from any actual formal border. Airports, even in the deep
national interior, contain within them legal international borders, safe zones, duty-free
zones, security screens, unsafe and quarantine zones, and other liminal jurisdictions

156

City Layer

and complementary policing programs. Looking at airports as a model for intermodal
information exchange, we see that the global mobility of people and things is possible in part because of the protocological standardization of an interfacial network of
airports and cities, arranged by increments of first-person travel time, hub-and-spoke
econometrics, and its flattening affectless provisionality of boarding lounge culture.
Movement through the airport’s multistage rituals of filtering and sorting paces the
User through densely juxtaposed police and leisure zones. Security agents examine and
handle your person in ways usually reserved for criminals and sans-papiers as you pose
in the midst of the leisure corridors where summary versions of human culture have
been miniaturized into inspirational magazines and the unchallenging solicitations of
snack food.
Airport urbanism in general is characterized by this critical cohabitation of security
and entertainment: securitized entertainment and entertaining securitization. In what
Virilio calls a “new topological order,” control is both hard and soft. The machine
guns are real and terrorists’ obsession with these sites is real, and the unspoken threat
of being grabbed offstage to be questioned behind closed doors by state agents able to
eject the User back across the world is also real.14 No less real are the digital departure
and arrival screens, the hyper-legible black-on-yellow Helvetica signage, the precise
strategic placement of the coffee carts exactly so many steps away from bathrooms,
and again that omnipresent media and candy matrix. Human occupation of this space,
a soft enveloping of delays and digestion in collaboration with the hard enveloping of
security and filtering, is elevated now to a general principle of contemporary urbanism.
For Virilio, this easygoing layering of exceptional, militarized space with the ambient landscape of airports’ generic “Singaporization” of the global city, positioned at
the critical interface connecting urban nodes within an expanded global sphere, is
the model for the city as rendered as information hardware and software. That is, the
airport discloses without fanfare that cities are airports. Airports are not simulations of
cities; rather cities are simulations of airports. It is where police deep-scan your person
while blending you a delicious smoothie of your choosing, and to do so without irony
or contradiction of purpose and affect. But this is not (only) a surreal pun on despotism; as universal urbanism, the business model also has to include the reactive management of individual User actions provoked by this accidentally sadistic little drama.
The scattering distribution of interfaces and the intensification of potential agency
reflected in the increased computational capacities of each does not dissipate the
weight of platform authorities, but it does reformulate their permissions. Perhaps
counterintuitively as interfaces become ubiquitous, interface decentralization becomes
the engine of Cloud centralization, and as these interfaces become channels of increasing
end User management, swarm intelligence, and spontaneous utility, Cloud centralization
becomes as well the engine of interface decentralization. The logic of the City layer of The
Stack power is thus both decentralized top-down and centralized bottom-up, as well as

City Layer

157

directed side-to-side interaction monetized as a raw social currency of cognition and
circulation. Look over there by gate 12 at the search field on every screen, in every hand
and on every lap, while the Users wait for their flights. See that what finally empowers
the interface is less its function as some coercive frame for all signification and gesture
than because it is so uniquely and relentlessly responsive to the nuances of every User’s
own desires, interests, and intentions. It may do one because it can do the other.
A second essay from the same era extended these dynamics into a new diagram
of the social writ large. Among his very last published writings, the essay “Postscript
on Societies of Control” ended up as Deleuze’s most widely leveraged observation on
the contemporary city and media. This very brief text is concerned with the historical
transformation of cities from an older “disciplinary” mode, coercing inhabitants into
governable mass envelopes such as schools, factories, prisons, office buildings, and
barracks, toward a new “control” mode, for which anyone’s self-directed movements
through open and closed spaces is governed in advance at every interfacial point of
passage, as built up parametrically through filtering gateways, point-of-purchase identity verification, and the local geography of entertainment. Control, which Deleuze
defines in terms of the addiction-debt-mimicry tropes of William S. Burroughs, normalizes oscillations between the striation and smoothing of urban space and gives
real-time shape to social systems convened by the soft cybernetics of interface design.
We recognize the city he describes as filled with suspicious responsive environments,
from ATM PINs, to key cards and parking permits, e-tickets to branded entertainment,
personalized recommendations from others who have purchased similar items, mobile
social network transparencies, GPS-enabled monitoring of parolees, and customer
phone tracking for retail layout optimization. In the “control” city, there may not be
a Foucauldian disciplinary gate because there is no “outside” to which anyone might
escape.15 For other Users, the interfacial regime at work already knows in advance that
they are not allowed into the generalized gated community, and for them there is only
outside.
Deleuze’s essay begins by contrasting Virilio’s analysis of the “ultrarapid forms of
free-floating control that replaced the old disciplines operating in the time frame of a
closed system” to Foucault’s disappearing societies of carceral discipline as evidenced
by a general crisis of enclosure. Where enclosures are “molds,” controls are instead a
“modulation,” a “self- deforming cast that will continuously change from one moment
to the other, or like a sieve whose mesh will transmute from point to point,” as laid over
soft focus phase transitions of activities without distinct beginning or end. Techniques
of identity are externalized into codes and passwords, overcoming the mass/individual
dynamic whereby each User is a provisional individual and each plurality is a market of
patterns and predictive models. Deleuze saw that an evolution into societies of control
is marked by the predominance of computational information technology as its signal
apparatus: “The societies of control operate with machines of a third type, computers,

158

City Layer

whose passive danger is jamming and whose active one is piracy or the introduction of
viruses.” He closes the essay with a warning of sorts about a hypothetical control city
that from today’s perspective looking back to 1991, when it was written, seems quaint:
The conception of a control mechanism, giving the position of any element within an open
environment at any given instant (whether animal in a reserve or human in a corporation, as
with an electronic collar), is not necessarily one of science fiction. Felix Guattari has imagined a
city where one would be able to leave one’s apartment, one’s street, one’s neighborhood, thanks
to one’s (dividual) electronic card that raises a given barrier; but the card could just as easily be
rejected on a given day or between certain hours; what counts is not the barrier but the computer
that tracks each person’s position—licit or illicit—and effects a universal modulation.

Now such urban interfaces—some carrot, some stick—are commonplace platforms for
overexcited social media innovation, for mixtures of locative media, augmented reality,
biometric and digital security, personal tracking and mapping, fitness Apps, automated
point-of-purchase check-out, and the products and services based on their convergences and combinations.
He concludes, “The disciplinary man was a discontinuous producer of energy, but
the man of control is undulatory, in orbit, in a continuous network. Everywhere surfing
has already replaced the older sports,” and indeed the drift through this version of the
control city is an encounter with layers of visible and invisible interfaces, mapping you
and rendering the world as an image map and image instrument for your particular
idealized conception of it. The scenario he describes is one where the only apparently
rhythmless intersections of free agents surfing across smooth urban canyons are in
fact governed by the highly striated weave of dense differential connections in specific
networks: one only because of the other. This city is not managed from some central
command position in the cybernetic equilibrium machine, like the Alpha 60 master
computer in Jean-Luc Godard’s Alphaville, but rather the inverse. Dispersal of authority
into hypergranular interfacial fields is the constitutional power; each “dividual” is cast
as a sort of cellular automaton, expressing absolutely specific intentions and instructions for an emerging territory in formation. That territory in turn is driven from the
bottom up according to the limited frames of thought, action, access, and expression
that its own aggregate field of interfaces presents to each User. The interfacial array
of the City layer is designed according to these conditional pragmatics of interfacial
access and communication points, each of which is both a particular discretely tuned
portal and an instance within a larger array.16 A totality of interfaces is then more
than the sum of these single encounters, as it also comprises the active power that
divides peoples and cities according to regular spatial and temporal programs; such
totalities emerge through the repetition of activation of particular combinations of
interfaces and are thereby a medium through which control distributes Users in turn.
As they serve as both indexes of interfacial connection and as media by which those

City Layer

159

connections are given shape, these networks also establish new territories by smothering precedent territories or interweaving with them asymmetrically. The soft violence
of this establishment is, once more, the constitutional logic of the City layer as a social
system and geopolitical framework, a logic of incorporation more than imposition. As
discussed below, some visual interfaces also work as regularized cognitive maps of the
urban interfacial territories in which they are situated, and as such, their semantic content can function as a binding collective representation of The Stack’s geography (or
even of a projected jurisdiction or an idealized polity), providing for its social regularity
and durable structure.
As The Stack enrolls individual cities into common platforms of energy, water,
labor, information, and so on, it also links their resource economies toward new capital streams based on urban services integration. Just as Google generates revenue by
repackaging the notions, preferences, clicks, and pathways of its Users, the City layer
generates sustenance not only through extractive taxation, but through the network
value drawn from perpetual interaction with the interfaces that constitute the city in
situated space. For this metroeconomics, the costs for sustaining infrastructure are to
be born by the platform’s algorithmic governance of its User-citizen-laborers-customers’
social intercourses and may also generate a platform surplus for those stakeholders
and for itself. In couching our idiosyncratic paths through city space, some ambient
urban interfaces become cash cows for the right Cloud urbanist, and so as cognition
and movement are translated and capitalized from User to Cloud, everyday living and
thinking in the smart city become a form of information labor.
Under these circumstances, geodesign focuses in on the plasticity of sovereignty,
not only on individual privacy but also on the valuation of plural motion, gesture, and
movement as the basis of fabricated polities. As we will see, one axis of innovation is
between the rights and responsibilities that the urban interface gives to and demands
from a User who is a formal legal citizen of its explicit jurisdiction versus those it gives
to and demands from a User who is not. We will find that in the future, the noncitizen
may in some ways enjoy certain advantages over the citizen as infrastructures may not
already be preprogrammed to govern that User directly as a formal subject but merely
to transact services with her. We may, in time, see the world’s population of noncitizen
residents of the City layer tip the scales to shift the architectures of software and sovereignty away from formal state jurisdiction and toward the platform sovereignties of
other transurban and transcontinental communities, configurations, and allegiances.
Or, we may not. The Cloud layer’s own political geographic accidents draw one framework for this, but the immediate provision of access at the point of an interface that is
deliberately ignorant of the national status of its User may draw another. Concern over
private versus public space takes on a different tenor when each is considered in relation to a Stack urbanism for billions of noncitizen temporary residences, as guaranteed
by a metroeconomics that equates User interaction with value generation irrespective

160

City Layer

of other legal claims that states would make on those transactions. This sort of politics
of the urban interface (also of the envelope and of the membrane, of the visible and the
invisible) may point toward another geopolitics of the City layer, one where the grim
and suffocating closure of Virilio and Deleuze’s “cities of control” gives way to descendant genres of urban-scale computation that their initial accounts could not anticipate.
In other words, like any other territory comprising reversible exceptional interfaces,
megastructures can sometimes be inverted in situ.
37. Force Finding Function Finding Form
As already suggested above, too much of our actually existing Stack urbanism is naive
and fragile, obsessed, for the time being, with the optimization of doomed municipal
arrangements and designed by marketing departments to be sold to urban managers
who don’t actually control what they think they control. This is to be expected, to a
certain degree, from a smart city discourse built on enthusiasm for simple fixes and
broken urban politics, but again there is still potential in what has gone wrong. The
Stack already sees the city as one layer in a larger totality, and not surprisingly, several
contemporary schools of thought conceive of designable urban space as a function
of delimited totalities, plotting how to rearrange every square meter of a zero-sum
geographical pie always threatened by a creeping ocean (real and figural). For some of
these indirect descendants of No-Stop City, the city is modeled as a dense material and
logistical equation within a receding horizon of data. Urban territory and graphical statistics are morphed into towers of intensive quantitative mass, sometimes representing
programmatic adjacencies, sometimes graphical indexes of relative sums, sometimes
formal profiles, and usually some mountainous and brightly colored combination of
these all at once.17 But such architecture may confront more problems raised by the
mutual design of quantified space and programmatic narrative than it resolves. In all
but a few cases, the dysfunctional relationship between database and narrative ends in
a stalemate, two symbolic forms able to communicate only by awkward irony. We can
still acknowledge impasses as lessons: the contrived statistical normalization of unlike
kinds of urban Users demonstrates just how difficult it is to design urban interfaces
for so many demanding occupants of the same location.18 Even as certain totalizing
ambitions of the City layer, those that see space as a closed set of universal modules of
production and consumption and cities as spreadsheets waiting for the right formulas,
are doomed to self-cancellation, perhaps the contradictions of this approach illuminate other paths.19 Cities are also media for rot. Smart cities are also dumping grounds,
platforms for human warehousing, telelabor dormitories, floating prison ships, entropic megaslums, spontaneous war zones, colonial settlements and encroachments,
contested archaeological dig sites, fabled ruins, periodic abandonments, dead malls,
sleeping cranes hovering over skyscrapers on pause, and similar things that defy easy

City Layer

161

tabulation and calculation. We see that the global composite platform City isn’t filled
up by one total informational model but by the overlapping and superimposition of
multiple models, multiple totalities competing for air, life, and dominion, and as their
juxtaposition comforts some, it discomforts others. By design or by accident, they are
all City-level expressions of The Stack.
More visible than esoteric forces of production and consumption, but no less important as governance interfaces, are those architectural surfaces and envelopes that
articulate physical and figural politics of urban space. At the same time that spatial
planning management consultants employ predictive financial models to ensure, they
suppose, a preferred quality of urban-economic performance, architectural design studios increasingly rely on generative algorithms as form-finding agents to calculate individual building morphologies in pursuit of other, sometimes conflicting, performative
goals. This division of labor between formal economics and designed form sometimes
bedevils progressive architectural design, a disciplinary project relegated to a thinner
and thinner slice of the structural pie. Among the most emblematic and visually striking formal machinations of today’s architectural vanguard are perhaps those gathered under the rubric of parametricism. These practices and techniques, much more
diverse that they may seem at first glance, use algorithms as design agents for the
partially automated genesis of complex forms and also supposedly to guarantee an
intelligent index of the intrinsic and extrinsic forces that couch a project’s programs.
In theory, important design solutions—programmatic circulation, interarticulation of
subsystems, site posture, material distortion, proportion and nested symmetry, energy
administration—may find direct formal expression by the mediation of the building’s
envelope as machine.20 As one contemporary derivation of D’Arcy Thompsons’s “form
is a diagram of forces,” parametricism’s often extremely self-conscious self-theorization
claims to use architectural form to communicate the social, economic, ecological, cognitive forces that, after having been codified somehow into Grasshopper scripts, are now
well disposed to disclosing themselves through the exacting distortions of involute
morphology. At the project level, it concentrates expertise on the delineation of bones,
surfaces, and skins at the unit level of individual architectural envelopes, hoping to
capture the lightening of global forces into the bottle of programmable metallic flora.
This strategy is partially a response to the diminished and decorative economic position for even famous architects in the post-Bilbao effect era, but it is also supported by
much broader and more substantial disciplinary interests (especially those that one
would not consider to be “parametricist” as such) in surface performance, living and
nonliving emergent systems, and alternative topologies as the loci for future design as
consolidated by a global signal style. They also speak to the unsure agency of algorithms
in the design and organization of space beyond the professional domain of architecture and architects. Pessimistically, we may lament that the impoverished perch from
which architecture has authority to say which assemblages go where is now reduced

162

City Layer

to variously thrilling or bombastic skins, shells, and special effects. Optimistically, we
might say that in these same post-Euclidean habitats, the stage is set for new, complex,
and challenging points of tactile encounter between human and architectural bodies
that don’t just index client programs but forcefully reinvent them. More than perfect
obedience to macroeconomic energistic field conditions, the more creative promise of
continuous involuted forms involves perverse moments of folded contact and nested
cohabitation between unlike bodies, flesh and form.
For the moment, parametricism and related programs have won one circumscribed
battle to represent early twenty-first-century supercontemporary style for airport cities, but architecture in general has badly lost the war for the design of urban space.
The two are at least correlated. Instead of design studios, management consultants—
McKinsey, Morgan Stanley and Halliburton to Cisco, Siemens and IBM—are winning
the city-making game, and they have rather different design interests in the flows of
algorithmic capital and its spastic valuations of land, energy, information, and human
capital. They too can be said to render the City layer as an imprint of the layers above
and below, and they possess equally deliberative mechanisms to structure urban systems accordingly. Their topological imaginary, however, is not the folded surface but
the calculative grid, and any disinterested alien intelligence would observe that today
most efficacious “parametric” urban design software is Microsoft Excel. In effect, management consultant–driven design has dislodged architecture and traditional urbanism
from the prime seat of authorship over urban form, as new built space becomes a formfinding by-product of speculative space-use and site-cost simulations. Their methods
pull data-driven design from deeper strata of The Stack, telescoping descriptive and
prescriptive algorithms set in motion in the Cloud layer and building their local franchises into urban (or “urbanish”) investments.21 Their spatial-systems economics often
outpaces legal codification, leveraging an arbitrage of gaps in formal building code and
zoning (but as well, from such gaps generative accidents of interfacial sovereignty also
hatch themselves). Their portfolios can be measured in millions of square kilometers,
but it seems that the quantity of officially futuristic cities is inversely proportional
to the quality of their futurism. New “totalistic” (not really totalitarian) smart city
initiatives from global information technology companies have borne real fruit for
those offering them, often finding clients in sovereign capital funds or in sovereign
governments directly.22 They also are in no way allergic to collaboration with (or subcontracting to) globally known architectural design firms. This mix of “real” architects
and urbanists with consultants and IT systems architects and administrators is neither
intrinsically offensive nor automatically fortunate, but it does alter the relative tabula
rasa on which synthetic megacities are built. No more Brasilia or Tsukuba Science City;
now we have variations on J. G. Ballard’s Super-Cannes: Masdar (Norman Foster, Partners, et al.), Skolkova (Cisco et al.) Songdo City (Cisco, IBM, et al.), KAUST (IBM, HOK,
et al.), and on and on.23 These Moon-bases on Earth are spliced from Soviet science

City Layer

163

cities, Silicon Valley campuses, Orange County gated communities, and a mutual
understanding between political despotism and technological innovation. They are
what cities look like in the shadow of airports, Special Economic Zones, and “sustainability mandates.” Some of these would redefine city-states as carefully policed service platforms, and for this, their urban-planning expertise relies on CRM (Customer
Relationship Management), DRM (Digital Rights Management), server virtualization,
end-User usage metrics, object synchronization across multiple devices and device synchronization across multiple data objects, at least as much as it does on architectural
design, and often not at all on things that are normally thought to make interesting
cities interesting.24 Like all Ballardesque metropoli, these cities are “post-interesting,”
which is itself interesting. Contrary to parametricism’s claims, figural virtuosity is subordinated to building forms that are recognizable and ad hoc, popular and stupid, but
amenable to the real estate metrics that outvote other politics of the envelope. A partial
list of these benchmarks includes both the sensible and the sinister: on-site carbon
footprint minimization, energy and water management, replaceable and recombinant
building materials, perimeter gate security, civic control contingency planning, bombresistant membranes, crowd circulation administration, tightly curated digital signage,
assigned parking spaces, account credit-issuing recycling bins, and, for some, separate
public entrances for citizens, tourists, women, unclean animals, and service staff.25
38. Envelope and Apparatus
In order to design with or against any given program, we need to understand exactly
how a given interface can construe the User of the City layer as a particular kind of political subject. We start with an interim summary of the varied and dynamic qualities of
the urban interface. Platform sovereignty can be a function of how a border or interface
addresses one or many Users and their interlocking relationships, while the City layer’s
physical and virtual interfaces and its architectural edges and envelopes can be equally
decisive in their governing methods. As these form a matrix of capture and control,
like all precedent models of spatial governance, they also enable new and unpredictable stages for urban performance and need not be computational in order to align the
urban environment into The Stack’s polyvalent claims on global space. Inside cities,
the line, the gate, and the wall separate inside from outside, quasi-private from quasipublic, and generate and direct flows accordingly. Some corralled spaces persist longer
than others, fleeting or permanent, and so even as they fix space, urban interfaces may
be in motion, however imperceptible their speed. Lines not only shift and perforate;
their ability to interiorize and exteriorize is also always reversible, and so even when
it does not move, which side is being exteriorized by the other can switch in the blink
of an eye: as it orders the landscape around itself, the center might hold, but what it
holds may come and go. As computational media prostheticize User mobility, virtual

164

City Layer

envelopes also slice up and program urban space, but along rather different planes than
fixed architectural surfaces do, and they do so with increasingly authority. The mobile
device’s interface is based on the semiotics of graphical diagrams more than architectural vernaculars, and so it can index and express The Stack’s organization of the city
as the City layer with greater explicitness than any building-scale morphology, and it
can do so on the fly for different Users according to different governing programs. That
said, it is only by conceiving the design of both physical and virtual modes of the urban
interface at once, either as conflicting or complementary parts of a whole, that we can
hope to intervene in their effects with consequence.
The User is constructed through an ongoing and uneven processes of subjectification, itself largely developed by the co-constitution of a subject or an agent who experiences a subject effect and the equipment and machines with which she addresses
her habitat. For example, Giorgio Agamben’s short essay on Foucault’s term dispositif,
translated as “apparatus,” locates the procedure of subjectification not with any single
tool (architecture, software, grid, self) but rather, as Foucault defines it, in the “network
that can be established between these elements.”26 That network-between describes
governance not in the resolved image of categorical self-idealizations, but in immediate events of world formation and subject positioning, working with or without proper
names at first, but which ultimately inspire durable discourses and their secondary
enforcements. For Agamben, “apparatus” realizes “a pure activity of governance devoid
of any foundation in being. This is the reason why apparatuses must always imply a
process of subjectification. That is to say, they must produce their subject.” He goes
on to say that “an apparatus is literally anything that has in some way the capacity to
capture, orient, determine, intercept, model, control, or secure the gestures, behaviors,
opinions, or discourses of living beings.” From this perspective, a subject is an effect of
what has been captured, oriented, determined, intercepted, and enabled in the course
of these networks, and whose agency is configured accordingly. Agamben proposes a
thought experiment to explain the essence of this distinction: the world is divided into
beings on the side and technologies on the other.27 “On one side, then, to return to the
terminology of the theologians, lies the ontology of creatures, and on the other side,
the oikonomia (economy) of apparatuses that seek to govern and guide them toward the
good.” The apparatus brings forth subjects that think and do according to the range
of possible dispositions it arranges for them. It doesn’t make them into automatons;
rather it establishes a certain field of enunciation, improvisation, innovation, which,
being similar for other Users of that apparatus, also provides terms for cumulative, collaborative work and social systems. For The Stack, we see that these subjectifications
are as limited and limitless as the capacities put into play between the “‘creatures”
and their “apparatuses,” between “the substances and the subjects,” which for Agamben’s neomedievalist metaphysics seem to overlap but not completely. In this sense,
for example, the same individual and the same substance can be the place of multiple

City Layer

165

processes of subjectification: the user of cellular phones, the web surfer, the writer of
stories.”
For reasons that will be clearer toward the end of the User chapter, we take issue
with Agamben’s rhetorical distinction between humans and machines as two different
kinds of things that may enter into only combinatory relationships. In the meantime,
however, the open-ended processes of subjectification through the apparatus is useful
in how it can be made to link different scales and genres of technologies at the City
layer in ways that likely exceed Agamben’s own interest and understanding. The apparatus describes architectural envelopes as much as a GUI, and so as a synthetic figure
it can represent the complexity of design’s assignment as it is defined both by exploring the material plasticity of the world, on the one hand, and the durable codification as a technique of enforcement, on the other. For The Stack, worldly interfaciality
includes any operation by which the world is sensed and made sense of; it may form
on (or as) the surfaces of User habitat, physical or virtual. The software and hardware
of a computational framework and the partitional network of architectural space are
both equally “apparatuses” and part of the processes of urban subject making. Through
the sheer quantity of User interactions, some emergent apparatuses may absorb the
roles of others already at work, transforming or displacing them in the process. This
transformation is traced by the shift from one program to another, from one dominant apparatus on which such a regime depends to another, and a migration from one
institutional isomorph to another. While the drifting transposition of stable discursive
technologies—a migratory power/knowledge (pouvoir/savoir)—from one institutional
architecture to another is familiar to readers of Foucault, for example, from clinics, to
asylums, to prisons, to schools, it doesn’t work only according to his genealogical and
archaeological models. The particular subject-making effects of a given apparatus are
not only situations waiting for the next authority to arrive. Rather in their immediate
physical operations, a specific apparatus regularizes structures of subjectification in its
own image in ways that are irreducible to, but never immune to, discursive context and
intention. So, yes, in this way, the medium can be the message, and so as the same User
hops from one apparatus to another, he moves between variations of subject, geography, and polis, a process that in turn cycles back through the system reforming both
the calibration of the apparatus and the User-subject over again.
Linking these, the polyvalence of the word program is again instructive, as already
suggested in relation to platforms. In software, the design of a program both enables
and configures the quality of a User’s agency in relation to particular hardware and
sets of actions that might be taken with it.28 For architecture, program entails a predictive determination of spatial habit sorted and staged in advance by a site’s plan. The
proposed design of a social organization in space is a techno-anthropological diagram
of work, play, violence, and collective phenotypical embodiment, all modeled as functions of particular strategies of sorting, partition, enveloping, interfacing, planning,

166

City Layer

and sectioning. For the architect, to posit a particular arrangement of activities, of
collective access points—of privacy and subjectivity and agency—is to set the stage
for some desired organizational-behavioral outcome, including even serendipitous
encounters.
Perhaps today no discipline has more expertise in interface design than architecture,
and perhaps someday no discipline will ultimately have more expertise in architecture than some expanded interdisciplinary mode of interface design, because for the
City layer, computation is not privileged over cement. The interfacial operations of
software and architecture should not be categorized as two distinct economies, but as
mutually involved sides of corresponding governing effects, sometimes symbiotic and
sometimes antagonistic in their relations. However, under the interfacial regimes of
planetary computation, programs that we may have asked architecture to host in the
past are now assignments for software, with the latter not only absorbing but sometimes
hollowing out the former as well. Meeting rooms become chat windows, store shelves
become online databases, places are geotagged, organizational hierarchies become firewalled User access configurations, and so on. This transformation doesn’t only dissipate
architecture’s authority (though in some instances, it does exactly that). Nevertheless,
because architecture works as collective interface to urban space and because computation draws our attention to interfaciality per se and its contested governance of systems, then how architectural design will continue to enforce programmatic authority
becomes an increasingly pressing question. Architecture’s ability to represent systems
(idealized, abstracted, mythical, logistical) exceeds any physical mediation of space,
and extends its reach beyond the semiotic play of the GUI at hand. At the same time,
a shift in design discourse away from symbolization, toward direct material effect, and
on political positions that are imminent in a structure’s postural embodiment in location, also has to be seen as a disciplinary reaction to the challenges posed by software’s
virtualizations of architecture’s heavier interfaces.29 It is a way of taking stock of what
is left.
In his influential essay, “The Politics of the Envelope,” architect Alejandro ZaeraPolo proposed a political theory of the (normative) architectural interface based on a
simple formal typology of the building’s envelope and of the different kinds of social
spaces that each gathers into its midst. His model seeks to index the political effects
of the architectural apparatus not in terms of what it might represent ideologically, but
how it directly organizes publics (or subjectivizes Users of the City layer) as functions of
the spatial networks in which it and they participate. In their different ways, envelopes
structure and express links between the building and the world and introduce the segmentation, hierarchy, division, compression, massing, or adjacency that is, in the last
instance, the reality of architectural micropolitics.30 Through a close reading of building face and volume, Zaera-Polo directs us to see the envelope apparatus as a medium
for the actors, networks, and assemblages that it might arrange, as well as a kind of
master actor within the networks and assemblages in which it is itself situated. In the

City Layer

167

terminology of The Stack, the interfaciality of different architectural surfaces enables
platform sovereignty through repeated access to networks and concrete images of those
networks. Zaera-Polo’s scheme characterizes the envelope beyond architectural expressivity, and treats it instead as a material interface of polities and geography in situ. He
writes, “A general theory of the building envelope aims to draw a direct link between
spatial typologies and political modalities of forms of political organization through
the identification of a series of concrete domains of architectural performance with
attached political potentials.”31 One structured micropolity is pressed against another
and linked by the fuzzy membranes that make and unmake publics in different shapes
and sizes. At the same time, however, his summary schema is limited in some of the
same ways as interface theory in general, namely, the abstraction and individuation
of one envelope from its contextual neighborhood of envelopes, which combine with
others into urban-scale landscapes of competing envelopes and the polities they convene.32 In groups, multiple architectural envelopes provide an interfacial rhythm that
can be monotonous, dissonant, or catalyzing. No one interface interfaces in a vacuum:
a fact regularly overlooked by normative interaction design methodologies that overindividuate Users, forever atomized and psychologized, instead of seeing them as part
of larger and less frozen subject-apparatus networks.
The interfacial problematics of the City layer include both the micropolities configured by architectural envelopes and the equally complex virtual envelopes that organize mobile Users as they meander past the gathering confines of any single building
form. Like the hard envelopes Zaera-Polo describes, software envelopes are also sites
of convergence between function and representation, linking program and figuration,
and so design of the City layer (and the programmatic envelope in particular) draws
from architectonic and urban formats alike, but no more so than from the diverse
media of planetary-scale computation. The mutual economy of software and architecture is one of programmatic drift, but the interfaciality of software is of particular interest for The Stack in large part because, as said, software is now asked to structure flows
of social organization that had once been the assignment of architecture in the modern era. For the moment, hard-into-soft is the more trafficked direction of programmatic transposition between the two, though that may reverse in unexpected ways.
While the virtual envelope may be amorphous and invisible, it is not structureless
or infinitely permeable. Software envelopes also conform into typological envelopes,
sometimes even in the manner described by Zaera-Polo, and according to their own
spatial politics, they can straddle the material and the immaterial, variously enforcing,
augmenting, or negating the hard architectural envelopes he describes. As physical
and virtual envelopes overlap, the clarity of a singular sharply defined exterior is less
certain; hard and soft interfaces leak information into one another through their perforated skins. This suggests a need not only for a parallel typology of software envelopes’
individual performances, but also for a composite matrix describing the differing ways
that physical architectural and virtual software envelopes interweave within the other

168

City Layer

to form the hybrid platform apparatus that in turn produces the subjects and polities
of the City layer.33
39. Designing for Mixed Envelopes, Mixed Programs
Toward drafting that matrix of mixed envelopes as part of the design brief for The
Stack, we may want to consider our own thought experiment: half of all architects
and urbanists in the world should, as of now, stop designing new buildings and new
developments altogether. Instead they invest their training into the design and programming of software that provides for the better use of structures and systems we
already have. It is a simple matter of good content management. The other half, the
control group, may continue as before. Very likely the first group, steered toward virtual envelopes, would quickly focus their attention on mobile handsets. Their design
brief might state that the essential function of the city is proximity—to people, markets, goods, transport, information—and that the handset condenses the City itself
into a remote control apparatus. For ambulant bodies moving through active world,
the handset is part of an active network linking site to speech and data and gesture to
affect.10 Mobile device plus city equals a composite read-write medium, allowing for
real-time communication, linking a User not only to the City layer of The Stack but to
the Cloud infrastructures that provide the cheap vapor of on-demand computation as
translated through the little glass screen. Its immediate functions can be modified in
relation to App platforms that transform the same machine from handheld telephony
into a homing beacon, high-definition video camera, music collection, Geiger counter, magic antenna, virtual goggles, scanning X-ray filter, field recording microphone,
medical monitor, or magic window that makes invisible things appear. Ambient urban
networks become in-hand animations with which to communicate with (or at) immediate and remote environments. This changes not just how people interact with cities
but how they see them as well. With the release of the first iPhone in 2007, a critical
mass of Users could envision interaction-in-the-wild as a new genre of computing, not
as a variation on a desktop or telephone experience but instead a personal interface to
ambient sights, sounds, and words. This would change how people see the device at
hand. The shift from point-and-click to multi-touch gesturing represents a kind of substantialization of data, now embodied in tangible interfaces activating a living information substance that you directly grab and manipulate. Enclosed in sensate glass, an
onyx frame of immanence, the device interface and hardware blend into what the User
takes to be a single dynamic form or field. Older genres of GUI offer menus and contextual options but rely on an instrumental distance between signifier and signified;
with iPhone, the mobile interface became filled with things more than with metaphors
for things. Couched in a face-like shell and illuminated from within, Apps possess a
prehensile tangibility to be pushed and pulled as organic, rubbery stuff. This tangibility

City Layer

169

and anthropomorphology are what make this apparatus work, socially and psychologically, as an urban interface, making it seem to link not virtually into a deferred realm
of the iconic, but directly to the physical world itself.
The City, as seen through the medium of that face, oozes with living data to be
touched and rewritten all over again. It doesn’t only represent its world, but affects
it as well; interaction is recursive, as a single User action is itself also new information
aggregated into a living whole, informing what everyone else sees as their map. This
recursion can cause one person to change his path and decisions in accordance with
the actions of another User as indexed by the App, which is itself read as a real physical
event, happening as part of the urban fabric, not floating “on top of it.” In this way,
the virtual envelope of the mobile apparatus is, as much as the architectural envelope,
a real circuit of movement primary to the City layer. But that equivalence also complicates programming strategies. Architectural programs and interfaces can be fixed
or unfixed and can be designed into permanent structure or as shifting furniture; the
same is true for software programs, which can be immobile site-specific installations
or mobile applications in the urban wild.34 For both architectural and urban projects,
“program” provides material support to social activities that repeat themselves within
predictable zones and partitioned locations, but as that material support is provided by
software, the spatial “program” becomes itself as mobile as the handset device, which,
for one or many Users at once, transposes that support into different locations at different times. As the functional organization of people across location and duration is
coordinated by software as much as by walls and zones, urban functions are translated
into applications, and as those are activated at a moment’s notice by different Users,
each application provides a different interface to the same location for each of them,
and so also a different urban program for each of the Users who happens to be in the
same spot at the same time. Unlike the architectural envelope that coheres a polity by
arranging its place just so, for the virtual envelope of the mobile apparatus, program
becomes less of a fixed posture rendered in plan than a setting of parameters of access,
improvisation, and opportunity. In other words, for mixed physical and virtual urban
envelopes, the program itself becomes the platform.
Surely, however, the most interesting design questions are not to be drawn by the
artificial separation of physical and virtual envelopes (such as my proposed experiment) but by reorienting software and urban programming to mix and merge in more
clever ways and, through this, to express emergent sovereignties more explicitly. The
two are drawn together as architecture becomes a staging plane for software programs,
just as software envelopes organize how urban space can be framed and activated.
Whose assignment is this? Computer science is not nearly ready to take this on alone
(perhaps someday), and architecture’s critical expertise in composing, replicating, condensing, and mobilizing the small and large interfaces of social space is woefully underused and underfinanced. A properly interdisciplinary design of the City layer would be

170

City Layer

both mechanical and dramaturgical; it would systematize the possibility of particular
events occurring, both on schedule and off, and would draw the scenarios by which
those events become richly woven languages. As the channels of the City are compressed and revealed by the handset’s interfaces, the virtual envelope’s augmentation
might dissolve the gravity of architectural programs, or it may harden it. Either way, for
architectural representation, the sectional stacking or planimetric allotment of discrete
zones for spatial-social behavior to take place within a single envelope, gives way to
interior and exterior encounters that can be activated in any number of different ways
by different people using different software in hand, and so from minute to minute,
as different Apps augment given spatial programs for different Users, any single architectural envelope is, to that extent, relieved of some of its programmatic responsibility
and specific purpose. The same is true (more so) at the urban scale, where multiple
architectural envelopes combine and compete, and where the distribution of formal
programs is also finally bound to formally restricted legal-spatial zones (e.g., residential, manufacturing commercial zones). But at this scale as well, when multiple Users
interact with a section of the City differently depending on what software they are running, zoning in the traditional sense becomes a much more problematic urban design
trick; it becomes a less enforceable and perhaps also self-defeating sort of rule making.
For the User, “use” is always mixed use, and so the design of the City layer requires a
new way to represent program, not one that resembles an OMA (Office of Metropolitan
Architecture) sectional diagram or the iPhone deck, but instead some kind of image
that can trace the interdependent contingencies of hard and soft envelopes across lived
network time.35
An integrated platform design would seek to modulate conditions of appearance
rather than attempting to script or contain what finally emerges. As discussed above,
the urban street grid platform itself works this way as the urbanite calculates his own
movements by the grid’s network. If the street grid were irregular and idiosyncratic,
it would not mediate the maximal churn that it does. But now the rational programming of urbanist modernities and developer-driven postmodernities converges with
software and hardware application programming interfaces and protocols with names
like GeoRSS, GML, GPX, KML, EXIF, and OpenSearch Geo. As these cohere in and as
the City layer of The Stack, our design concern should be with how a mixed interfacial
regime could support a loquacious multiplication of outcomes impossible for either
hard or soft systems alone. Some mixed platforms are already encoded into isomorphic
software suites, some of which are the lattice on which designers might conjure and
implement forms across multiple scales. The Stack’s layers arrange open and closed
channels of access, manipulation, function, and irrelevance, and through these designers designate where to situate interfaces, speculate how to capitalize undervalued interactions to come, and, if they work on behalf of established Cloud platforms, extend and
enforce the centripetal advantages of those particular services. Today some designers

City Layer

171

are trained to design for inside the glowing glass rectangle of the screen and some for
the outside spaces in which screens are situated, but many of the most pressing opportunities of the City layer demand amphibiousness. For savvy urban designers, equally
adept with physical and virtual envelopes, it’s not difficult to make up long lists of
possible projects: augmented reality Apps for ambulance paramedics and open-air
surgical theaters; a mash-up of post-Twitter microblog Apps linked to post-Siri voicecontrol interfaces and trans-Google translation software, together posting anything you
want to say to anyone anywhere always; citizen activists using GIS, mass-market geobrowsers, and modified drones to streaming real-time C3 video to 3D-printed phones;
mining composite crowd-sourced behavioral data to optimize the recycling of postpurchase prosaic junk; real-time flu outbreak visualization and private microgovernance of microbiopolitical swarms (a premium upgrade only for club members); traffic
control sensor and smart tollbooth hacks; individually reconfigurable robotic building
interiors collapsing rooms and even floors serving different programs in morning and
at night; anonymized parking markets based on bitcoin and namecoin; building exteriors featuring networked cinema, not on thirty-second loops but on eighteen-month
lunar cycles; lifelong syncing of car-phone-home-Clouds platform allegiance chosen at
birth like football team fandom; Google Office per-minute commercial office leasing
apps; personal RFID managers; rock star privacy consultants—all driven by (at least partially) open APIs enabling other applications to build further on their existing traces.
Insert your own schemes and nightmares here.
Regarding the experiment suggested above, for two groups of architects assigned to
tackle the virtual as well as the physical envelope, it’s certain that even this is fraught
with risk, not only because of what it would leave behind but because of what it might
accomplish and quickly lose the ability to control. The experimental half turning its
attention to the virtual envelope should consider several admonitions in advance. First,
the computational city activates human-object networks that are both new and primordial at once. You should anticipate the rapid coevolution of urban behavior and urban
software, such that the mobile handsets themselves and their capacities will appear
to be evolving more in relation to each other than to us. This fast Darwinism of the
device will make it seem as though we are their media, and not the other way around.
Such appearances may prove to be true. The explosion of hyperlocal and hypervisual
information will both amplify and multiply the intensities of social interaction, but
will also reveal the scale and complexity of communication between nonhumans (animals, ecologies, infrastructures), such that at just the moment at which our collective
urban cultural cognition comes online, it will be exposed as a hopelessly outflanked
minority discourse, a dying language even. Quite clearly the computational intensification of the GUI interface will make it more animated, more speech-based, and more
seemingly factual, exacerbating everything we already know about the instability of
cinematic diegesis (memory, action, projection, pixelation, repetition, juxtaposition,

172

City Layer

correspondence, false causality) now brought deeper into everyday life. The social-psychological results of all this will be complex and contradictory, as pervasive computing
makes inanimate objects see, hear, and comment on our interactions with them. This
experience may, in many cases, be observationally indistinguishable from a psychotic
break or from the affinity rituals of animism. In a recent interview, Virilio notes that
today’s qualities of technology—instantaneity, ubiquity, immediacy—are those associated with the divine.36 As we’ll examine in the more detail in the Interface chapter, the
killer application of pervasive computing is not advertising to the hipster flâneur; it is
closer to something like religion, and its impact on non-secular polities and monotheisms will be turbulent, existential, and fertile.
40. Programs, Subjects, and Zombie Jurisdictions
But first, I turn back to how the City layer and its platform apparatuses can generate
accidents of sovereign subjectivization and how platform megastructures at this layer
do and do not work to envelop stable Cloud polities. Well before smart cities evangelism, the modernist call for a more intense technologization of design’s disciplinary
doxa, blending urban and cybernetic programs, was a predominant discourse.6 For a
century now, it has asked us, in one way or another, to recognize the network city as
a shared nervous system, connecting each of us on its terms. Today, however, mastery
and transparency are not the only values in play. The accelerated rupture of computational forces up from the Cloud through urban orifices, out into the open view, relies
not only on formal piloting of a User along his course, but also on her capacity to
proprioceptively map her own displacement in real and imagined geographies.37 That
self-directed—if also still tethered—drift is not antithetical to control and its spatial
governance of unwalled User subjects, but at the same time, the legal neutrality with
which its ambient interfacial infrastructures address those subjects can result in unexpected, and even disruptive, new demands for access and recognition by those Users.
As envelopes compose the urban landscape, the work they do aggregates into regular
networks of open and closed centers, pathways and clusters, which in turn combine to
give form to territories and larger geographies, but as often as not, the territories produced make conflicting claims on the same User. The generative accident of the mobile
apparatus, within the City layer, is the spawning of unintentional sovereign positions
into which Users can step, even if they are at odds with formal scripts of jurisdiction.
For example, in the specific case of the elongated wedge envelope-interface of the
US-Mexico international border, its geopolitical disciplinary intrigue spins out as many
exceptions to its control assignment as it manages to enforce. As a jurisdictional membrane, many parts of this border are less like the tightly packed machine of a customs zones in an international airport, coding every centimeter with the neutralizing
authority of the legal grid, than a wide liminal expanse where the legal transition and

City Layer

173

translation from one national status to another is vexed, intangible, and dangerously
ambiguous, even as the resolute bluntness of the wedge tries in vain to remain unperturbed by that ambiguity. An exemplary fundamentalist reinscription of Westphalian
geography, this border tries to cohere and filter control over production and consumption chains between North and South into a single horizontal line. It encapsulates
a specifically programmed regime of differential mobility, in which some things are
heavily sponsored flows (goods and services) and other things (human bodies) are
heavily restricted, the latter then driving the gray and black economies that sprout
in the border’s cracks. The border is an architecture of both systemic wealth centralization and provincial immiseration. Its geography writes both integration and severance, from the disembedding of local and regional economies to maquiladoros (globally
owned factories along the border) and formal kleptocracies, to a cannibalistic drug
war feeding the chemically induced mania of American cocaine users (where a neurochemical event inside the head of one person in Los Angeles results indirectly in the
decapitation of another person in Tijuana), all operating under the sign of modulated
flow: flow of capital, flow of risk, flow of commodities, flow of drugs, flow of serotonin,
flow of trucks, flow of tourists, flow of cash, flow of vegetables, flow of electronics,
flow of chemical waste products.38 Along the border zone, where everyday emergency
is unexceptional, the rule of law is either comically overenforced or tragically underenforced, both outcomes ensured by a principle of flow along paths of least resistance.
As a case study in how the architectural envelope and the virtual envelope can work
at productive cross-purposes, it is worth considering in some detail one design project
that toys with the paradoxical transformations of the User-migrant-subject status as she
moves across this particular jurisdictional melange.39 Some colleagues at the University
of California, San Diego, B.A.N.G. Lab, directed by Ricardo Dominguez, earned the vitriol of local nativists by developing an App called Transborder Immigrant Tool (TBIT),
which, when installed on cheap and recycled handsets with GPS, is designed to aid
those traveling by foot across the treacherous Sonoran and Mojave deserts from Mexico
in the United States (or perhaps the other way around) by directing them to nearby
water stations set up by other Samaritan organizations.40 The migrant humans against
which the border wedge defends jurisdictional order can get stranded in a dry sea of
sun and sand, neither here nor there. But as far as the device apparatus is concerned,
their presence there and their use of the Interface is neither legal nor illegal; they are
just a User, and that’s good enough to provide full infrastructural and territorial access.
Agamben’s own perspective may be instructive here, and at least partially so by its
demonstration of tiresome blind spots. “Apparatus, then, is first of all a machine that
produces subjectifications, and only as such is it also a machine of governance,” and
vice versa, “Indeed, every … apparatus implies a process of subjectification, without
which it cannot function as an apparatus of governance, but is rather reduced to a mere
exercise of violence.” This violence is another name for what Agabmen calls a “process

174

City Layer

of their de-subjectification,” or of removing the very possibility of subjectivity through
a kind of total and standardized form of capture, whereby the contradictions of multiple subjectifications are flattened. He sees this as the political tenor of the apparatuses
we work with today. And yet at the same time, he hesitates: “It would probably not
be wrong to define the extreme phase of capitalist development in which we live as a
massive accumulation and proliferation of apparatuses. … We must also immediately
consider the apparatuses that crowd the Open with instruments, objects, gadgets, odds
and ends, and various technologies. ... This may produce the impression that in our
time, the category of subjectivity is wavering and losing its consistency; but what is
at stake to be precise, is not an erasure or an overcoming, but rather a dissemination
(of multiple subjectivities).”41 At once we have both fewer and more subject positions.
Now this apparent contradiction—that today’s computational apparatuses desubjectify
but also multiply subjectivities by their own proliferation—may but just the right paradox to map; more of less and less of more. It may also locate the point where we now
abscond with the idea of interfacial apparatus from Agamben’s stewardship altogether,
if only because it is already quite plainly doing much in the world more than his
account can account for (i.e., “in the untruth of the subject, its own truth is no longer
at stake. He who lets he himself be captured by the ‘cellular telephone’ apparatus—
whatever the intensity of the desire that has driven him cannot acquire a new subjectivity
but only a number through which he can, eventually, be controlled” (emphasis mine,
eyes rolling).
The notion of a “right to the city,” for anyone to move and navigate freely through
urban space and to engage with it on his or her own terms, is a rallying truth for critical urbanism, but its exact terms are as uncertain as the convoluted control structures
of the City layer against which the notion maneuvers. In addition to a right to general
passage through urban interfaces, it also includes some right to use these for one’s
open-ended creative purposes, not only for closed-loop consumption.42 For its part, the
TBIT device elegantly unknots several governments of mobility at once, including the
mobility of the handset, enabling a territorial mobility of the person, in turn enabling
a mobility of his position within political networks.43 Perhaps part of the reason that
TBIT, even just as a poetic prototype, drew such seething anger from some quarters
is that how it obliquely but unambiguously signals a structural shift in the agency of
excluded Users to access the regional interfaces-networks-territories.44 The alegal status
of the migrant shifts between two modes of the biopolitical: that which is banished
and left to die and that which can be killed with impunity.45 The migrant is not only
outside the walled protection of human settlement but sentenced to the vast unwalled
“camp” of the desert, both inside the law of national border and outside the confines of
the societal. Drifting, she is cast into a zone of ungovernable nature, further animalized
by xenophobic paramilitaries on the prowl, themselves acting both outside the law but
also in the name of a jurisdictional border, defending the arbitrary line itself as the true

City Layer

175

sovereign. In the nativist view, it is not the migrant’s right to passage or employment
that is or is not legal, but that she herself, her very person, is illegal. It is less that the
migrant commits the felony of entering the country without permission and is therefore a person who has committed a felony (like tax evasion, securities fraud or animal
cruelty, for example). Rather, by a strange inversion of habeas corpus, it is more that
her very body and its presence on the land is a felony, and so to arrest her mobility is
not just to stop the movement of a person, rightly or wrongly; rather, the capture of
her biological person is to police a crime that is embodied therein.
TBIT does not attempt to transform the nonperson of the migrant into a formal
citizen; rather, it positions her as a User, and that User position, halfway as it is between
dispossession and citizenship, may prove to be a more powerful and resilient subject
agency than we might normally expect, not only for migrants but for Cloud Polis going
forward.46 For this User-as-sovereign, the apparatus is an interface to the territory, functionally agnostic to the User’s formal legal identity, and so it can rewrite the geography
not by rigid subdivisions of mutually hostile states and the prophylactic imperatives of
national immunity, but toward another unspecified urban vocabulary of an open territorial commonwealth. Here we also get a useful glimpse of what the virtual software
envelope, to extend Zaera-Polo’s schema, is capable of providing besides constitutional
programs of control and commercial software mash-ups. The reorganization of spatial
access through a new interfacial regime introduces new de facto “rights to the city”
to those with otherwise insufficient political agency, and so it encourages alternative
geographies to proliferate, not by decree but by physical occupation (as even Schmitt
would have to acknowledge). As they do, they promote and enforce innovative claims
over what the City layer is and does, and for whom and for what. The nativists’ outrage was not incorrect in this sense, as the acute implications of the project are indeed
catastrophic to the idea of ethnically and geographically pure polities. And so, one generative accident of this layer is the germination of such informal User “cosmopolitanisms.” They arrive as functions of the omnivorous neutrality—even universality—of an
interfacial regime that produces a polity of User subjects that is far more inclusive than
state sovereignties can manage. States often react to these by refortifying their policing
of identity, even of their own “organic citizens,” and so, as said, we can anticipate some
scenarios in which the noncitizen User may enjoy more spatial permissions than the
citizen User because the City layer’s vision is not programmed to see and govern her. At
the same time, as we’ll discuss further in the User chapter, this agnostic universality can
extend User suffrage not just to humans, but to any agent capable of interacting with
that interfacial regime as a deliberate actor (e.g., car, animal, microbe). This should
alert us already to the limits of interpreting interfacial governance along an axis of
individual agency versus collective interest. Instead, the design problematic is to make
more explicit how plural configurations of User positions cohere across different scales
and rhythms.

176

City Layer

A global political and geographic dynamic is demonstrated by the TBIT controversy,
and that a real subjectivization is at work may also clarify some of Agamben’s unfortunate confusion regarding the contemporary mobile apparatus. As we consider how
global geography is remade by The Stack, another lesson to glean is that whenever
there is a persistent and broadly experienced mismatch between, on the one hand,
a residual legal-political form (an old legal statute attempting to govern and contain
what it can neither describe nor circumscribe) and, on the other hand, an emergent
social-technical form (a new social condition arising from a new network condition),
then we can expect the structural momentum of that emergent form to spawn various “criminal” connections and transferences, both amorally and asubjectively. It just
does. A critical mass of such emergent connections or actions may, for good or bad,
eventually overwhelm heritage lines in the sand. To be clear, this is very different from
the transgression of an active code. It is less illegal than it is alegal: illegible, invisible,
outside, or just incommensurate to established legal supervision. Even if the state can
see it at all, it still cannot name it properly. The alegal represents an embryonic quasiagency, neither exactly inside or outside governance, nor exactly inside or outside markets, but largely generated by platforms directly, and they can also be founding figures
of a preferable geopolitics that we may honestly anticipate for The Stack.
This is especially true if that future platform, that interfacial regime to come, would
technically be illegal according to today’s statutes. Worse perhaps than the criminalization of culture is the criminalization of infrastructure. Such alegal actions and events,
normative tomorrow but prohibited today (Do we call them “postcrimes”?) fulfill the
programs provided by new networks in an autonomic and sovereign disregard of zombie jurisdictions. Alternative geographies appear in the repetition of actions and processes that are as illegal for one jurisdictional geography as they are constitutional of
another, even as the two occupy the same location. To design the City layer in the
image of that emergent political geography (with the emergence, not against the emergency) also means to design, as B.A.N.G. Lab has done, through the interfacial agencies
that this alternative is already formulating in its disinvestment from the geographies it
overwrites. That is how to conjure it.
41. Megastructure and Utopia
That’s no moon, it’s a space station.
—-Obi-Wan Kenobi

In the accidental platform sovereignty of a migrant’s apparatus, we may see a certain
slow-burn afterimage of Göbekli Tepe and the circling movements of its mobile admirers, and as part of that image, what some might call a virtualization of the City layer is
certainly part of the design program. At the same time, those Westphalian geographies

City Layer

177

are engaged not just at the tactical level of the savvy User, but also at the scale of the
Cloud platform, and their interests and intentions are very different. While Cloud platforms may capitalize interactions between any and all Users, their own designs for the
City layer may be represented more by megastructural artificial geographies—formal
utopias even—that allow them to program their own encapsulated territory according
to more predictable plans. What kinds of cities are our major Cloud platforms actually
building, and how do they choose to make architectural scale footprints on the City
layer? Put differently, after the above consideration of how the City layer’s envelopes
and interfaces might be expressed at the Cloud and User layers of The Stack, and what
kinds of deliberate and accidental platform sovereignties this enables, we also need to
ask how the Cloud layer expresses itself directly at the level of the City layer, and when
this preserves or dissolves those platform sovereignties.
The Stack, as a whole, structures the City layer through the consolidation of urban
nodes into megacities and also through the consolidation of both public and private
urban systems in megastructures. We’ll find that instead of heterogeneous and open
interfacial platforms, for their own footprints Cloud platforms prioritize instead urbanscale walled gardens. The megastructure provides a bounded total space in which architectural and software program can be composed by complete managerial visualization;
for it, the border, the gate, and the wall bend into closed loops containing vast interiors, sometimes in pursuit of utopian idealization and isolation. The megastructure is
an enclave within the city that also holds a miniaturized city within itself, and so the
specific and different terms of that miniaturization are the vocabularies of differing
utopian agendas, whether explicit or suppressed. Its curation of opacity as both a spatial strategy and an affectation operates not only in and on the skin of its closed physical envelope but also within its capturing claims on the virtual territories of the Cloud
Polis. As we’ll see, these closures are often interdependent, one closing off a physical
site into an artificial island for which the inward bend of the envelope gathers a polity
into form and the other cordoning off parts of the electromagnetic spectrum itself as
another equally important megastructural territory to utilize. Their geographic secession provides the megastructure one measure of spatial sovereignty, one that begins as
a function of autocratic enclosure but can also be leveraged well beyond physical jurisdiction and into the realms of iconic form and charismatic mobilization. The politics
of both are utopian and dystopian at once, one never really able to purge itself of the
other, always able to flip into the other and back again, depending on where you may
be standing and why.
The image of global urbanity as a single contiguous body is drawn at the scale of
the whole spherical planetary surface, and we certainly have no shortage of depictions of it, especially at night, as a throbbing weave of life, light, movement. (What
telecommunications brand can make it through one fiscal quarter without advertising itself thusly?) It’s less clear, however, what this obligatory geographic icon

178

City Layer

might communicate other than communication itself. Like the Incan geoglyphs of
pre-Columbian Chile, does the global urban weave have pictographic content to be
read from above, or, like the Earth art and maps of Robert Smithson, does it make a
pedagogic point about geological time and perspective?47 The image of urban neural
nets draws more specifically on an aesthetics of logistics (more in this in Interfaces
chapter) and from an admiring contentment with network topologies as some final
form and format. In such renderings, networks more than cities (and specifically the
metanetwork of The Stack) are indeed monumentalized. The pronouncement may be
something like, “We are those who have wrapped the planet in wire. This is the signal accomplishment of our time. Our pyramids are gossamer shaped.” This imageinfrastructure tries to capture some important change in the local-global telescoping
between anthropometric habitat and the wider urban envelope. The City layer of The
Stack itself operates as a massively distributed megastructure and draws on, however
obliquely and opportunistically, the reservoir of speculative, even utopian megastructural design projects of years past (built and unbuilt), even realizing them after
the fact with a sometimes perverse inversion of their original intent. As discussed in
the Earth chapter, in and around the years when the first photographs of Earth were
taken from space, speculative architectural design was inspired by the visual scale of
the whole Earth as a comprehensive site condition and spawned scores of now canonical megastructure projects. Many proposed total utopian spaces (islands cut off from
the rest of the world, per Fredric Jameson’s discussion of the utopian genre in science fiction), including, as already mentioned, OMA’s Voluntary Prisoners of Architecture (1972) and Superstudio’s planet-spanning Continuous Monument (1969),
while others sought the utopian through the maximal perforation of boundaries by
ludic interfaces and absolute grids, including No-Stop City (1969) or Constant’s New
Babylon (1959–1974). The merger of cities into planetary-scale conglomerations was
imagined, among others, by Constantin Dioxiadis as Ecumenopolis, a single planned
urban form across the whole world, and Paolo Soleri as Arcology, enclosed megacities
rising into the lower atmosphere, so large that they constitute their own ecosystems.
The impetus for these massive, even planetary-scale architectural propositions may
be a positive or negative reaction to the Buckminster Fullerian vision of Spaceship
Earth as a single design problem, and attempts to see the whole of society in terms
of the whole of space (part of the desire for totality important to Jamesonian utopian desire and dystopian anxiety).48 The projects provided a link between the grandiose progressivism of high modernity, such as the massive Karl-Marx-Hof in Vienna,
a neighborhood-sized building from 1930 holding over 1,300 apartments, and ideas
for extraplanetary colonies on Mars, dating at least to the late nineteenth century.
For many of these, the goal is a wholesale replacement of the modern programmatic order of nested and individuated buildings, cities and states with new models
and programs, perhaps along that continuum from strong architectural authority

City Layer

179

(Voluntary Prisoners of Architecture) or to an open, ludic urban field (New Babylon),
for which megastructures serve a new spatial authority more appropriate to a properly
global society.49
The composite megastructural form of the City layer of The Stack (composite in the
interweaving of physical and informational infrastructures in a given site, as well as in
the differential integration and disintegration of continental urban sites) is, in some
ways, a realization of Apollo-era architectural mega-utopianism (total envelope, universal interfacial grids, superimposition of quasi-sovereign layers) and in other senses an
almost complete inversion of it (regularization of production and consumption cycles,
strong filtering of individual mobility, intensive capitalization of every encounter and
gesture). We can see aspects of these utopian projects in the City layer today and recognize their evil doppelgangers as well. This is possible perhaps because The Stack works
as both a control mechanism and a means to open up and flatten access, providing one
because it provides the other, and so it is not surprising, then, that it would discover
the legacy of utopian megastructures through this very reversibility. For example, Foxconn is the largest private employer in China and assembles much of the human-scale
digital electronics equipment that connects urban society to The Stack. Its largest factory city, in Longhua, Shenzhen, situates an estimated 300,000 employee residents
in a massive live-work complex. It is a megastructure by sheer architectural scale and
social totalization, and one could also say that Foxconn is an island and therefore
prone to both utopian and (as has been more the case) dystopian imaginations. Along
the spectrum of platform openness versus closure, Foxconn’s regimented cycle of life
passing from one phase to another, perhaps until death, places it at the end of a dotted line leading through Voluntary Prisoners to the present, each the prototype for the
other. Its factory floor is responsible for the physical assembly of much of the world’s
consumer devices, laptops, smart phones, and as these are the essential physical interfaces between Users in motion and the recombinant landscapes they strategize, it is
also a savage realization of Archigram’s Plug-In City (1968) and Computer City (1966).
We see Superstudio’s fabulous Continuous Monument realized by Global Crossing’s
massive deployment of transoceanic fiber optics during the dot-com frenzy in the late
1990s. Superstudio’s was successful as a project but unbuilt; the telecom’s was built but
busted its investors. We can measure No-Stop City in the compulsive speed of ambulatory urban computing and the interfacial city without beginning, end, or middle.
We imagine Cedric Price’s Fun Palace (1961) turned inside out by North Korean stadium pageants where the audience itself is the media content, but instead of free to
play, each actor is instead rendered into disciplined pixel within a larger choreography
of the spectacular image. We could mark an ancestral trace from Yona Friedman’s La
Ville Spatiale to the new Asian smart cities such as New Songdo City (“a ubiquitous
city,” says its brochure) in South Korea’s Incheon development, or see Paolo Soleri’s
Arcology as a first pass at Masdar, the massive “green” smart city in Abu Dhabi. (Both

180

City Layer

Songdo and Masdar were built with Cisco and IBM as key partners.) Is Situationist cutand-paste psychogeography reborn or smashed to bits by Minecraft? What binds the
hyperlibertarian secessionism of the Seasteading Institute, which would move whole
populations offshore to live on massive ships floating from port to port unmolested
by regulation and undesired publics (Facebook funder Peter Thiel is a key funder)
with Archigram’s Walking City project from 1967, which plotted for Star Wars Land
Walker–like city machines to get up and amble away to greener pastures as needed?
For that matter, as models of programmable planets and embryonic Matrioshka brains,
how should we weigh Cisco/NASA’s Planetary Skin, which, as we know, would blanket
the globe’s epidermal crust with ubiquitous physical sensors, on one hand, and the
Death Star, on the other? For the Death Star, as for the animal brain, many of the most
important information processing and mission-critical tasks take place on the outer
surface of the sphere—on the skin, not in the core. Palm Jumeirah, Taitlin’s Tower, USS
Enterprise, the Pentagon, Noah’s Ark, Le Corbusier’s Plan Voisin, the New South China
Mall, Ryugyong Hotel, San-Zhi Pod Village, Sim City, Irvine: it gets harder to keep all
these walled megagardens straight.
Just like the City layer does and does not generate new forms of sovereignty as a function of a specific politics of envelopes, both physical and virtual, themselves defined
by the reversibility of its interior and exterior, the urban platform is also defined by the
reversibility of a design gesture’s ultimate effects. The utopian and dystopian will invert
one into the other without even switching places! The aspiration to the comprehensive “content management” of everything that lives inside its fold drives the City platform to open and close, to centralize and decentralize, over and back again, instituting
control though the universality of its interfacial protocols, and vice versa. It may be
that the agonistic logics of politics—drawing lines between friend and enemy over and
over—make it more difficult to see how the technical achievements of constituencies
that we believe we oppose also can form the basis of the real alternative systems we also
seek to design. For the geopolitical ruptures of The Stack, we can be sure that reversibility sloshes both ways: if Voluntary Prisoners can become Foxconn, then the Foxconn
apparatus-assembly archipelago could also provide the genesis of further inversions
and utopian opposites. If it does, would we be able to notice them? The Obama era, you
will recall, started with a new vogue for infrastructural investment and governance, but
the fashion proved short-lived and easily diverted. The overleveraged early 2000s “Bilbao effect” architectural projects were supposed to give way to massive public spending
on large built systems that actually did things, but the new New Deal didn’t happen.50
For some bets, attention turned toward compressed natural gas development at the
expense of more difficult-to-solve renewable energy sources and systems, and for others
to actively preventing infrastructural development of, for example, airport expansion
or the Keystone tar sands pipeline from Canada into the United States. For the most
part, the new infrastructuralism sought less to mitigate against the risks of algorithmic

City Layer

181

capital and anthropocenic growth than to update their armatures: think Sir Norman
Foster’s Beijing Airport (built) versus the North Sea wind farms proposed by OMA (not
built). Around the time of Obama’s second inauguration, we also received word that
Foster had received a most extraordinary commission. His office was asked to work
with the European Space Agency to design structures to be 3D-printed on the moon.
The prospect of constructing new civilizations from whole cloth on nearby planets and
moons has inspired no shortage of utopian schemes, but in this case, that cloth is the
moon itself, turned into the printed matter with which off-Earth habitations might
be mechanically excreted.51 Such a project should be called robotic terraforming as
much as off-planet urbanism because instead of sending designers and building supplies across the vacuum of space, the mission calls instead for programs (call them what
you like: scripts, recipes, algorithms) that would instruct a replicating printer to build
up new structures layer-by-layer of lunar soil, and in time fill the sunny southern lunar
pole with new airport cities.
The choice of Foster’s office for this project like this is not surprising, as he is arguably the preeminent architect of the Google Earth perspective: he might terraform
the Moon because he has already, project by project, terraformed Earth. Regardless
of how you may like or not like the projects, from Masdar to the new Reichstag and
the Gherkin, few contemporary offices have done more to expand the perspectival
scale of architectural figuration than his. Architectural students now include “satellite”
view along the required plan, section, elevation, and axonometric perspectives on their
projects, and his portfolio suggests one reason why. While a building’s face has usually
been read from the view of a pedestrian front or entrance, Foster’s projects (especially
but not uniquely) are sometimes best considered from tens of thousands of feet in the
air, as landscape-scale interventions in relation to the urban regions that they gather
into their midst. The megastructural scale of the projects also confirms a gathering of
social totality into a single envelope (as drawn from high above, instead of in sectional
view as for the Palace of the Soviets or OMA’s CCTV, or Dürer’s Triumphal Arch, for that
matter) into which that massive enclosure inhales utopian aspirations (of the client
and their publics). At the same time, the universal management platform of the smart
city, such as Foster’s Masdar plan (with IBM, Cisco, and others), gathers its world less
through the anthropometric technique of the envelope than through the anticipatory
and parametric management of the discrete energy event. By circumscribing and rationalizing a local polity of the electron as the core constituency of urban governance,
this genre of urbanism supervises not only a social totality of humans but also a closed
ecology of bounded energy flows. For urban projects such these, the preference is for
green infrastructural systems that sense and spit back data suitable for macroscopic
images of those flows which are then made into interfaces and thereby instruments for
the recursive management of those flows (see the Interfaces chapter). As legacy cities are
slow to acquiesce to this managerial and ecological reason, megastructural architecture

182

City Layer

refers back more and more to the Apollonian scale-image of the Earth to prosecute
on behalf of its synthetic ecologies, now so much more manageable because they are
legally and ecologically delimited by the building envelope.
A case in point is Foster’s unbuilt Crystal Island in Moscow, a massive hyperboloid,
Christmas tree–like tower that would contain a myriad of residential, cultural, and educational programs under its glass skin and within its 27 million square feet, four times
the size of the Pentagon. After the financial crisis, development financing was frozen,
and the tower is not likely ever to be built. Keller Easterling also links the project to
utopian schemes of yesterday, some now registered into architecture’s critical canon,
others still languishing in the historical junk pile of unacknowledged visionary cranks.
Like Masdar, Foster’s secessionist Island chooses to recommends itself as an exemplar of green urbanism in that it can generate much of its own energy needs, allows
carbon-friendly internal transportation from home to work to leisure, and as a city
within a city, offers a centralized economy of scale and density for the consumption
of resources. Easterling’s critique, however, draws on a Sloterdijkian trope of the planetary condition seen as vast interlocking layered interiors, and she argues that “capital
A” Architecture’s response to the challenge of the Anthropocene is not properly met
by bubble-era faux-Arcologies such as these. Ultimately it may well be that The Stack’s
intensive global mesh of megacities will support megadense resource economies that
drive the development of larger and larger buildings, like the larger and larger bombs
of the 1950s and the larger and larger airplanes of the 1970s. Both of those arms races
were “won” by the Soviet Union, with the 50-megaton Tsar Bomba and the 300-foot
Antonov 225 airplane, neither put to much real use, and now Moscow could someday
add Crystal Island to this collection of hypertrophic trophies. It may also be that this
scalar recalibration of built interiors will realize the positive effect of drawing more and
more networks, and even territories, within one building’s single, intelligent interfacial
design scheme.
Even so, the proper architectural address of the design challenges of a now permanent ecological exception remains with the still-unfinished Copernican conceptual
recalibration: that our planet itself is already the megastructural totality in which the
program of total design might work. The real design problem then is not foremost the
authorship of a new envelope visible from space, but the redesign of the program that
reorganizes the total apparatus of the built interior into which we are already thrown
together.52 At best, flightless spaceships, such as Crystal Island, will be interim experiments that clarify the imperatives for more ambitious and meaningful geodesign. At
worst, they are alpha versions of luxury enclaves, post-crash storage facilities for dead
currency notes, or props for the closing shot of the next Planet of the Apes remake.
However we may choose to read the lessons they provide, there is no expansion or
any a single building envelope that can actually accomplish what is asked of these
projects: “architecture” is perhaps the wrong metaphor for architectural thinking and

City Layer

183

experimentation to lean on. As the larger architectural imaginary tries to shift from
what the professional assembly of buildings asks from it and toward the technological
reassembly of the territory itself, we join it in groping toward a design brief for the governance and geopolitics of The Stack, especially in regard to that Anthropocenic ecological exception. In doing so, we realize that Foster’s building is simply way, way too
small.53 It is actually a miniature in comparison to what is needed, and far too beholden
to the traditions and economics of urban program from a bygone era. Instead we would
do better to draw energy from artificial envelopes that do less to seal off and subdivide urban polities and do more to enable the appearance of programs that we cannot
already anticipate, measure, or rent and resell in advance: a megastructuralisim based
not on the metaphor of the ark but on the scale and ubiquity of Earth’s atmosphere.
42. Platform Cities
Early results are mixed. Cloud companies building smart cities and key architects
designing enclaves for Cloud companies might together point us toward that ark or to
something more interesting if less recognizable.54 They may provide some additional
clues for the design brief, both by what they get right and what they get wrong. It is in
this context that we can also tally how global Cloud platforms choose to express their
terrestrial presence through the medium of architecture on the City layer, not only
by marking the imprint of their subterranean data centers but also by a close reading
of the new megastructural headquarters built to house the embodied human intelligence of particular Cloud corporations in Silicon Valley, California. By comparison,
recall the Chrysler Building on 42nd Street and Lexington Avenue in New York City,
designed by William Van Alen for Mr. Chrysler himself in the late 1920s, as exemplary
of an older contiguous and self-contained organizational body. The preponderance of
a company’s executive staff coinhabited a vertical castle, summoned into a singular,
internalized corporate hierarchy, modeled in the stacked floors and rigid posture of
the tower.55 In his ponderous film Cremaster 3 (2002), Matthew Barney takes on the
construction of the Chrysler Building as an occult epicenter of bygone symbolic economies of industrial power, old money, and organic class hierarchy. The conspiratorial
conflict involves “the architect,” an “entered apprentice,” and some other stuff related
to Masonic lore and the grandiloquent opacity of deep wealth. Now in considering, for
example, the Googleplex in Mountain View, or the proposed new Apple headquarters
in Cupertino, we might well wonder (and shudder) if some future Matthew Barney will
dance through their hallways with similarly reverent obsequiousness? Do the old and
the new headquarters even traffic with the same denominations of spirit and cash? The
answer leads mostly to other questions. Below, then, and to conclude our discussion
of this layer, is a bit of architectural phrenology and corporate-scale palm reading (or
at least one biased interpretation of platform models replicated as organizational space

184

City Layer

and form) of current headquarters plans understood as an expression of the Cloud layer
into the City.
“In the plex,” Google’s footprints seem less determined by architectural innovation
than by the nuts-and-bolts accommodation of an elite, idealized elective community.
Prioritized over style is the compound’s performance as a support system for the peak
cognitive labor that is staged there. Instead of being stationed with magisterial Art Deco
appointments as were Chrysler’s executive elect, Googlers lunch together on artless
furniture, and while they do, they enjoy free and nutritious gourmet meals. Why fuss
with decorative aesthetics when something far more valuable is being hatched during
the meal? Available onsite amenities include massage, free bikes, indoor rock climbing, and regular symposia with thought leaders on a range of topics. Efforts are made
to couch an idealized version of programmer lifestyle in its own idiosyncratic luxuries
and to dampen any distraction or discomfort that might interrupt collaborative innovation, including perhaps going home. The Googleplex (the architecture of which was
designed incidentally by Clive Wilkinson and others) may already serve as a kind of
model sub-urban spatial system for the maintenance of global software platforms, but
for that, it is also a highly selective population of Users. Unlike some utopian communities, Google’s infamous and seemingly obtuse interview questions guarantee that
entrance into this rarified colony is filtered according to demonstrable problem-solving
acumen, creativity, and academic pedigree.
This older more insular version of Google Cloud Polis’ footprint will apparently be
getting an upgrade if it is approved by municipal councils. The oddly paired Bjarke
Ingels and Thomas Heatherwick may be designing a new Google campus in North
Bayshore, initially dubbed “Google 2.0” and marked by ambitiously open groupings of buildings (“workshops”) and gardens beneath semi-transparent canopies. The
project seems to enable a more open and diverse social machine than a hermetically
sealed campus bubble might. It is still geared toward staging and accelerating cognitive accomplishment, or as Heatherwick says in the project’s video, “what is the best
possible environment we can make, to invent, engineer and most importantly, make
ideas happen and go out into the world?”56 Strategies for that staging move past the
open-plan faux warehouse, “our self-driving car team, for example, has very different
needs when it comes to office space from our Search engineers,” Google executive,
Daniel Radcliffe explains. Others are more circumspect about the “Googledome,” arguing that it is either a wasteful expenditure or that its success will further gentrify the
area, making it all but unlivable for anyone but the elect.57 It is too early in the project
to say anything definite about is success or failure on specific terms, but we can read
in the choice to keep (at least parts of) the campus open to publics including retailers
and non-employee pedestrians that Google wishes for its footprint to be more than
a high-performance vitrine for its human resources, and more like a spatial platform
that draws surplus value from and provides lesser surplus value to those who come. It

City Layer

185

suggests an idea about the company that is more urbanistic than architectural, however
artificial it may appear at this point. The project seems to aspire to be not a basecamp
for a single optimal community but a prototype armature for an optimal microsociety
through which people move in and out. If the campus is a sort of utopian idealization of the Google Cloud Polis itself, this version, unlike some others, at least makes
some gestures toward including the outside User in its model. The project is still to be
approved, if at all, by Mountain View city council, and so we shall have to wait and see
what is actually built to compare the real environmental platform to that proposed.58
By contrast, looking at Frank Gehry’s early proposals for a new Facebook headquarters in Menlo Park (nicknamed “Zee Town” after company founder, Mark Zuckerberg)
we see a plan for a more traditional corporate campus, designed, it appears, to ensure
the managed serendipitous contact between employees in motion. In this encapsulated
“company town” winding pathways and strategic lines of sight connecting interior and
exterior views are embedded in a multilevel landscape where sub- and superterranean
greenery twists and turns onto and under the collection of buildings.59 At their desks,
the aggregate social graph of the on-site employee/resident population is framed and
displayed to itself as it moves and involves itself within itself in airplane hangar–scale
open-plan work space. It’s an obvious but valid observation to note that the collected
body of Facebook employees is here mediated by Gehry’s proposal as a closed-loop
network of people, one that will ostensibly perform at a higher level should its undulating nodes and edges be given a single supportive program. Unlike the old Googleplex, defined by robust services in a generic, no-frills context (like Google perhaps),
Facebook’s seems more tuned to the advantages of the active performance and the
structured monetization of captured human networks (like Facebook itself). For its part,
Amazon recently took over a huge high-rise campus in the South Lake Union neighborhood of Seattle, and there it will help to consolidate its scattered executives into one
big storefront.60 Plans for another nearby location also include a “biosphere” building
featuring three huge glass domes in which full size trees and other flora will grow in
simulated ecologies.61 For Amazon to encapsulate ecosystems of nonhumans is perhaps
the point. Together, the urban headquarters will integrate the company into the fabric
of a “real city” in ways that the suburban Silicon Valley campuses will not. Amazon’s
society will have comparatively blurry boundaries between itself and the rest of the
world, similar perhaps to how the mega-retail platform is a more agnostic medium
of supply, demand, and algorithmic recommendation, defined by behind-the-scenes
engagement with its outside suppliers and Users.
This is fine and well, but the far more important architectural-urban footprint of
the Amazon Cloud platform is not in Seattle but distributed among the company’s
many fulfillment centers, especially in and around the logistics plantations near the
airports of Louisville, Kentucky (UPS’s hub) and Memphis, Tennessee (FedEx’s hub).62
Amazon’s platform logic is based on the massive coordination of the pricing, retail

186

City Layer

display, storage, and delivery of its flat commerce ontology of objects. If Google’s mission is to organize the world’s information, Amazon’s may be to organize the world’s
tangible commodities. This places it on a direct collision course with Walmart, but that
company has been slow to move into e-commerce and still largely uses its supply chain
omniscience to guarantee itself economies of scale with a limited range of downmarket
goods—a very short-tail strategy—sold through its network of grim retail centers to
people who may not have so many other options.63 Amazon uses the physical supply chain itself (especially Cloud infrastructure, airports, warehouses, and third-party
delivery services) in lieu of any big box retail holdings. These networks, taken together
as a composite Amazonian territory, are the platform’s megastructural play at the City
layer, all but invisible to its Users save for the vast Amazon.com website. One can go
inside those object-network machines and find unsentimental beauty in their airportadjacent logistics so precise and responsive that they could be described as a form of
artificial intelligence. That description will become more true as Amazon’s warehouses,
sorting, and distribution facilities become further populated by robotic systems and
“workers.”64 We might anticipate that in a few years, an Amazon platform User could
choose an item online and have it retrieved (even manufactured), mailed, and delivered with no human touch, at least until the last postal mile. This may be welcome or
terrifying news to the precarious population of current Amazon warehouse workers. As
discussed in the Cloud chapter, many are nomadic part-timers coming and going with
the ebbs and flow of retail demand. Those with relatively permanent positions, called
Amazon fulfillment associates, are divided among those on the receive lines, the pack
lines, stockers, and pickers who are directed by handheld devices to find your order
wherever it may be among the immediate stocks of children’s bicycles, shoe repair kits,
and physics textbooks. By all accounts, Amazon space is already built on the nimble
precision of a logistical engineering of human workers’ movements with a repetitious
efficiency probably better suited to robots. In describing the stress and precariousness
of work in Amazon fulfillment centers, GigaOM, a Bay Area technology blog, went
so far as to characterize employment at Amazon as a “dystopian model of neofeudalism.”65 As Amazon absorbs, centralizes, and consolidates production labor into tighter
strata of proprietary commerce-logistics algorithms, the future of work is made that
much more uncertain, and along with it the buying power of the workers who would
also be their customer-Users.66
Perhaps the boldest (not necessarily best) design statement made by a Cloud platform is Campus 2 in Cupertino, as proposed by Apple and Sir Foster during Steve Jobs’s
last years (though when Jobs pitched the plans to the Cupertino City Council, he
neglected to mention with whom exactly his vision sought collaboration; Foster was
not named). Plans show a giant toric “spaceship” (Jobs’s own word) landed among apricot groves in apparent prelaunch posture.67 The design harkens to Eero Saarinen’s Watson Research Center for IBM (1961) and the many mid-twentieth-century suburban

City Layer

187

corporate exurban campuses, but instead of a set of buildings, Foster’s closed ring fits
an entire campus inside one curving arc.68 To many, it resembles an austere relative
of Herzog and de Meuron’s Allianz Arena (2005) as transplanted from Munich into
more bucolic Northern California or, better, a cult-inspired interplanetary escape craft
straight from a Michel Houellebecq novel.69 The vast closed (infinite) loop contains 2.8
million square feet of interior space, but appears to have no face to the outside world,
no real front or back, beginning or end. Perhaps this replicates the looped border of
the Westphalian state or the utopian island. Descriptions used in the proposal like
“integrated” and claims that it will “create a physically unified community” rather
understate the insularity of this habitat with its central plant, cavernous underground,
and off-site parking. Once employees have made their way back to the surface from the
subterranean automobile rump state, they will look out and see only the trees for the
forest. Withdrawn into this island package, Apple citizens will enjoy the benefits and
suffer the fragilities of the reserved enclave.70 Bunkers imply security, control, purification, and impenetrability, but like the walled garden of iOS itself, it can also suffer from
having to serve as both platform and content at once. As others have observed from the
distant sidewalks across the entrance roads, this sort of suburban walling off of a corporation’s population may be less futuristic than it is a throwback to 1950s campuses. As
opposed to the old “creative class” accommodations of urban contact and stimulation,
here Apple recedes and secedes into the controlled space of the curated megastructure.
As the price of total interiority is a “disappearance of the outside,” for utopian platforms like Apple’s, the price of that curation is closure.71
Perhaps, however, the design gesture is working at a much larger scale, not in relation to any one nearby downtown but, as for all of Foster’s projects, as part of a higherstakes process of terraforming the Earth and building his own distributed portfolio of
Earth bases (in many cases directly on behalf of The Stack’s expression). The shapes of
things to come? What has already been said about the Apple Cloud Polis in the Cloud
chapter is perhaps also seen here extruded into an architectural programming strategy:
curated and closed off, affectively perfected, explicitly branded, secretive and opaque,
totalizing and majestic, a theological rhetorical voice, etc. The utopia on offer to its
OS Users is a slightly ecstatic platform that seems to transcend mere computation and
operate more within a realm of ineffable experience. That the social contract of that
experience would demand such secrecy, silence, restriction, and exclusivity is not necessarily unusual as political theologies go, but that it would be invested in branded
equipment that connects Users to the Cloud layers of The Stack is an important novelty.
In anticipation of the ultimate footprint and expression of the Apple Cloud platform
into the City layer of The Stack, we also note that the integration of the closed megastructural platform model is now planned to include Foster’s refresh and redesign of
Apple’s most public terrestrial presence, its hundreds of brand retail stores. That Foster’s office would become the house architect of the Apple platform’s human-facing

188

City Layer

earthly permeation suggests that his acumen with megastructures serves to organize
the physical expression of the Apple Cloud Polis’s City layer more generally. Apple has
invested in the biological extravagance of the iconic megastructure in ways that the
other platforms have not, including its resolute ambition to utopian totality. Certainly
the data centers, warehouses, and logistics parks that give shape to Google, Amazon,
and Facebook are no less geographic in scope, but they are not foregrounded as the face
of the Cloud Polis in the same way. The incipient Cloud Polis of these other platforms
does not rely on the ethics and aesthetics of total design closure with nearly the same
intensity as Apple does. Google’s networks surely are megastructural in their scope and
universality, but they do not observe the guardianship of interior borders as the essential principle and promise of User experience, whereas Apple’s do.
So truly, with Foster’s other commission to design printed structures on the Moon,
should we decide to categorize the Apple Cloud Polis as part of that collection of megastructural Earth bases? The question remains, however, per Crystal Island, whether this
design is properly suited to post-Apollo logics of geographic scale and the recognition of
any project’s expanded planetary situation. Is it instead another ark built for paranoid
withdrawal, a design to sustain life on a hostile alien planet even if that planet is our
Anthropocenic Earth? There are surely many ways to characterize how the megastructure works at the City layer and from these to draw out different implications. Unlike a
real moon base or Buckminster Fuller’s Domed City, for example, many such structures
are not designed only for the permanent or even semipermanent housing of humans
in settled encampments. Like the temple at Göbekli Tepe, they may also be monumental landscape switching stations through which we might pass on our way. Their scale
and centrality demand this passage, and the arcs of our movements are composed in
their bending toward the gigantic nodes. We don’t reside in Foster’s Beijing Airport,
but we must pass through its digestive system if we are to reach the next level of our
passage in or out of China. Other megastructures are not only impermanent, they are
also not designed for the mediation of humans at all. Most of the very largest buildings in the world accommodate and express the algorithmic resorting and distribution
of inanimate objects, commodities, and cargo from sites of extraction, to assembly, to
consumption, and back into landfills or the production cycle. As already noted, the
relative freedom of objects to cross borders and gather global materials into themselves
is far less restricted than the passage of people, bound as we are to the rights and
restrictions of formal political citizenship. The physical object becomes the exemplary
noncitizen User of the City layer, as the most intensive impact of algorithmic capital
into the physical realm of The Stack is in the molecular reassemblage of standardized
matter, its global redistribution as manufactured objects, and the computational optimization of their itineraries through supply chains. All of these enjoy their own kinds
of megastructural theater. At the City layer, this object-oriented economy of molecular
logistics is expressed in “planetary supersurfaces” such as warehouses that are so large

City Layer

189

that their floors have been laser-leveled against the curvature of the Earth. Instead of
walls and windows, these spaces are programmed by bar codes, RFID chips, and scanners and populated by robotic platforms, shelves, and stockers that can easily lift over a
ton of goods at once.72 From the perspective of The Stack looking out at the Earth, these
architectures of and for things are perhaps even more essential than those rendered for
the benefit of human appreciation (as discussed in more detail in the User chapter).
Taken as a whole, these Cloud platform megastructures concentrate the City layer
by drawing economies of flesh, information, energy, and symbolization into a web of
settlement and displacement as vast as it is uneven and asymmetrical. Often a megastructure will have a special interdependent relationship with another, such that its
own enveloping closure belies dependence on a doppelgänger megastructure, one
perhaps a continent away, for its own energy, purpose, and support. For example, as
said, Apple’s spaceship in Cupertino, California, where design and strategy live, cannot possibly exist without the Foxconn factory campus in Langua, Shenzen, where
Apple’s products are assembled from parts into the perfected slabs that tether its Users
to its Cloud platform.73 Even as they occupy different corners of the globe and remain
selectively ignorant of what goes on in the other site, the two megastructures are intimately paired. They share a unique bond across the strange distances of the City layer
binding them together in ways that penetrate the total closure of their envelopes by
doubling and mimicking one totality into the other. Foxconn’s fences sit next to suicide nets as Apple’s sit next to apricot fields, Foxconn’s dorms occupy Apple’s subterranean parking, and Foxconn’s massive assembly lines tag along with Apple’s customer
service training programs. Together these megastructures, along with the network of
mall-based retail embassies, constitute the terrestrial urbanity of the Apple Cloud platform, but their symbiotic relationship may prove to be more fragile than it may seem.
Like the Eloi and Morlock from H. G. Wells’s The Time Machine, the megastructures’
two paired populations share the same world but inhabit different spaces, one above
ground and the other underneath. One lives in the perpetual innocence of play and
leisure, experience, design, and innovation, staying strategically distanced, oblivious,
or uninterested in how it all appears every morning for them, while the other runs the
machine underneath, toiling against the Earth, forcing it to produce the bounty over
and again. It is perhaps a bad omen for Cupertino that the bargain between the subterranean world of the Morlocks and the surface world of the Eloi is maintained only
because the Morlocks periodically harvest Eloi like cattle and eat them.74 Lesson: for
better and for worse in various measures, the cannibal economies between networks
of megastructures at the City layer of The Stack are actually not always what they first
appear to be, and almost always reversible.75

Address Layer

Matter thus resolves itself into numberless vibrations, all linked together in uninterrupted continuity, all bound up with each other, and travelling in every direction like shivers through an
immense body.
—Henri Bergson, Matter and Memory1
Never will he [the emperor’s messenger] win his way through. And if he did manage that, nothing would have been achieved. He would have to fight his way down the steps, and, if he managed to do that, nothing would have been achieved. He would have to stride through the
courtyards, and after the courtyards through the second palace encircling the first, and, then
again, through stairs and courtyards, and then, once again, a palace, and so on for thousands of
years. And if he finally burst through the outermost door—but that can never, never happen—
the royal capital city, the centre of the world, is still there in front of him, piled high and full of
sediment. No one pushes his way through here, certainly not someone with a message from a
dead man. But you sit at your window and dream of that message when evening comes.
—Franz Kafka, “An Imperial Message”2

The objects on call for The Stack’s logistical imaginary are organized in whirlwinds
but their itineraries are anything but random. The cartographic imperative of planetary-scale computation extends beyond remapping the Earth’s surfaces in horizontal and vertical subdivisions of land, air, sea or cloud; it includes the addressing of
every “thing” therein that might compute or be computed. Individual units of life,
loaded shipping containers, mobile devices, locations of datum in databases, input
and output events and enveloped entities of all size and character are kept in rhythm
not only by the mixed envelopes that contour their paths but also by the synthetic
address cartography superimposed on their global fluctuations. In many cases, the
geography of this addressing bears little or no resemblance to the physical proximity of one addressee to another in physical space. Two things adjacent to one another
may have completely nonsequential addresses, and things with sequential addresses
(perhaps considered adjacent according to some virtual geographic order) may be

192

Address Layer

many time zones apart from one another. Furthermore, as we will see, the Address
layer of The Stack is not only a master plane where individuated addressees are situated; it is also a medium of communication between them. Things can send and
receive information to and from one another because they are positioned on this
common plane, and so planetary-scale computation is made ubiquitous not just at
the macrolevel of the Cloud but also at the microlevel of the humble object, whatever
its name or career.3
Common addressing tables are a means to enable forms of universal communication
with sometimes very different ends, and so more than one specter of ubiquitous computation haunts the landscapes of our material imagination. The design problematics of planetary-scale computation push up against the expansion of infrastructure at
urban and transcontinental scales but also draw on the dilution of small-scale objects
into something like a universal solvent of synthetic computation. By comparison, we
are no longer so impressed by the prospect of “smart objects,” interactive habitats, and
reflexive architectures. Now projects seek “networked matter,” the hybridizing of digital bits and pieces of the physical world, both above and below anthropometric scale,
into an ambient field of systematic intercommunication and assembly. Joining the battalions of RFID-enabled objects would be smart dust, robotic insects, transistors inside
of living cells, and programmable clay filled with zillions of nanometric machines that
can take on any animated form. Research programs such as Hewlett-Packard’s Central Nervous System of the Earth (CeNSE), work toward the trillion-sensor world in
which bridges, trains, warehouses, earthquake faults, trees, flowers and animals, and
even internal organs are filled with tiny sensors, each transmitting data directly to
one another or to the Cloud.4 The promise (or threat) of designing with a computation
that is so deeply laced into the structures and behaviors of matter is an ambition for
addressing platforms of comprehensive transparency and the remote interaction with
the world at a chemical and atomic scale. The motes falling in space that fascinated
Lucretius would be addressable data points and their transit fields a programmable
clinamen. Why stop at a trillion? The “googol sensor world” or “Avogadro’s number
address world” might allow Users to search the whereabouts and state conditions of any
“thing” that one could imagine as a discrete addressable event. This open assignment is
the basis of many different possible designs. One path suggests a full-spectrum surveillance society, in which no biochemical misdeed goes unsearchable and unnoticed, but
another suggests an almost inconceivable reopening of the possible qualities, grammars, temporalities, and polities of material communication and design. For one, the
world closes down on itself, reduced like an algebraic equation to baseline symmetries,
but for the other, it opens up as never before. The design brief of the Address layer of
The Stack contains the seeds of both outcomes.

Address Layer

193

43. Scale, Scope, and Structure
For any thing or event to participate in the worlds I just described, it must have an
identity and location that makes it available for connection with other things and
events. On its own, it is not present; it needs to be made into an “it” with a location. It needs an address to have an identity, and any address requires an addressing table commensurate with the scales of our Stack scenarios. The ability to assign
addresses is critical to any geopolitical system (including The Stack). As discussed
above regarding the nomos, it is essential for any political-geographical regime to be
able to identify the individual sites, fields, instances, and actors within its jurisdictional field, such that any of these would be able to send and receive messages from
the others as part of a regular and governable flow of information through space. The
terms of the nomos are also the shape of that space as configured by the flows that
fill it up. For modern governance, this requires not only the subdivision of geography by lines, but also the superimposition of a formal addressing matrix onto new
or existing geographies and the assignment of individual addresses to unique points
within them. Furthermore, the hierarchical semantics of the address may also express
divisions of geography (e.g., the sequence of building number, street, city, and state
for Western postal addresses). Political space is both made and made legible through
such categorical presentations, and the ancient and modern histories of cartography,
geography, geometry, and geoscopy are interwoven with comparisons between real
physical features of the world and these ideal abstractions that measure, codify, and
explain their scales, similarities, and differences. That legibility depends on the identification of individual datum (any reference point on the planet’s surface) against
which position and measurement are made, in reference to the addressing of some
subsection of that surface (e.g., that site pinpointed as the intersection of longitudinal and latitudinal lines). In turn, the composite whole model is derived finally from
the spaces of difference between internal individual points and sections, occupying
positions relative to one another. The model names the points, and the points add
up to the model.
The drawing of such a matrix of lines and inscription on the Earth, perhaps in military competition with another enemy abstractions, is also a demarcation of possible
interior and exterior relations and of political spatial orders to be accumulated and
occupied. At the level of the City layer, however, the structure of addresses is applied less
in the service of absolute state geography than for the production and regularization
of sender and receiver relations among situated networks. The assignment of a unique
postal address to a building gives it a certain legal, political identity as a public entity
to which and from which messages can be sent, and the official enumeration of these
identities by the state has been an essential feature of the political modernity of cities
and a source of sovereign legitimacy for their governance. That legitimacy is enforced

194

Address Layer

by maintaining the apparatus of postal identify for sites within the polis and securing the right to recognize and assign new identities with new addresses. Sovereignty
over communication flows may arise from this monopolistic addressing of senders and
receivers, even if the privacy of individual messages is formally guaranteed by physical and virtual envelopes. Later, states (and others) would credentialize permission for
messaging with postage stamps, imprinting the message with its official seal and selling access to a delivery infrastructure on an parcel-by-parcel, address-to-address basis
(consider that it is Charles Babbage, inventor of the first modern computer during the
Victorian era, who also contributed to the design of the first system of flat-rate postage
pricing instead of rates based on distance). The problems posed by international post
for the mutual recognition between different stamp-and-addressing sovereignties were
worked out as late as the Treaty of Bern and the establishment of a Universal Postal
Union in 1874 (China did not sign on until 1914). But even with some functional measure of global interoperability between postal domains, the heterogeneity of legacy and
local addressing schemes and procedures persists and even multiplies with the development of information technologies. For example, whereas in Western systems, postal
addresses go from the smallest to largest entity (person, house number, street, city,
state, country), in Japan, addresses can move from the largest to the smallest (prefecture, municipality, ward, city district, city block, house number) in addition to a postal
code. Moreover, exceptions are found inside the exceptions. In Kyoto, wards are very
small, and often they share the same name, and so informal addresses are commonly
used instead; in Sapporo, the city is divided into quadrants, and blocks are named
according to their distance from the intersection of the center point of convergence
of the North-South and East-West divisions. Around the world in many older cities,
building numbers may have been originally and unsystematically assigned according
to the chronology of their construction and so sometimes in relation to buildings long
since gone. More recently, some master-planned campuses also feature buildings numbered in near chronological order, while other developments subdivide areas according to vertical and horizontal grid matrices, like a spreadsheet with addresses of “A5”
and “F9.” Each system is logical in its own way. At the same time, the assignment of
addresses and street names is not only a matter of logistical rationalization; it can also
stage highly charged political symbolism. Revolutions are often solidified through the
replacement of one geographical regime of street names with another, giving a new
identity to the physical polity and its urban stage (France in 1789–1799, Russia in
1917–1921, and Iran in 1979 are well-known historical examples).
An addressing regime does more than imprint identity onto an existing geography
of things; a new regime of segmentation and organization overhauls relations between
what is enrolled within it, and does so regardless of whether it is organizing physical
or virtual space. As in Thomas Pynchon’s The Crying of Lot 49, the control of the postal
address code is essential to how states, real and imagined, can see and manage both

Address Layer

195

territory and the territorialized. As its authority delimits the addressed and is itself
in turn limited by the addressed, the focus of its control shifts to the enforcement of
these systems of signification and to how each system subdivides and individuates
the world in different ways and toward different ends. For example, the number of
possible addresses in any addressing scheme is based on the ultimate granularity of
the total possible senders and receivers within that delimited space. According to the
five-digit US postal code system, the entirety of US sovereign land can be subdivided
into 105 possible zones (including all possible ranges from 00000 to 99999). Because
this has proved insufficient for automated paper envelope routing, another four suffix digits were added in 1983. (Compare this to the Millionth Map project beginning
in 1913, which would have subdivided the Earth into 1 million individual mapped
zones.)5 With the development of global information technologies, the capitalization
of new forms of virtual space suggested additional addressing measures, including the
subdivision of the frequencies within the radio spectrum and their defined allocation
for specific public and private uses. Here the “geography” is as physical as the ground,
if also invisible to humans, and measured not by longitudinal grids but in the increments of wavelength: kilohertz, megahertz, and gigahertz. At different frequencies, different communication networks are provided specific zones of operation so that they
won’t interfere with one another, including commercial television, broadcast radio,
cellular telephony, satellite communication, aeronautical radio, commercial Internet,
and secure military lines. For this, the division of space into specific discrete plots is
less to identify sites within a point-to-point messaging network, as it is for post, but
to delimit and corral mutually incompatible signals and channels from one another.
For the former, the governance of addressing ensures the triumph of signal over noise
by making sure messages arrive only where each is intended and meaningful; for the
latter, it ensures that unlike messages don’t trample over one another as they occupy
different parts of the spectrum but pass through the same physical location. A perspective that foregrounds the infrastructural agency of Hertzian space in relation to
territories of ground and water might understand the entirety of that spectrum as a
kind of atmospheric megastructure, another invisible architecture enveloping and
organizing the world within itself. Inside it, two channels compete for the ability to
occupy a certain enumerated frequency according to their physical distance from one
another in the spectrum and by the sheer strength of signal. The antagonisms of Hertzian geography aren’t an oceanic or aerial smoothing over the striated limits and edges
of mountainous land; their addressing is based more on resonance within a field than on
discrete position and on relative amplitude more than simple presence and absence.
Nevertheless, in order to make practical use of the spectrum, humans require tangible
hardware that can carefully tune, send, and receive signals, and each piece of hardware often requires a single discrete address, as if it were a house on a street, in order
for a particular message to be properly relayed to it and to it alone. At the social level,

196

Address Layer

when particular pieces of hardware, such as a telephone and its telephone number, are
linked to particular individuals, we are accustomed to saying that this person has this
phone number, so that he or she is known by that spectrum address. In ye olde times,
people kept “personal phone books,” paper volumes in which they wrote names and
numbers, to associate people known to them and the addresses of the telephones they
were most likely to answer if called. People even committed some of these numbers to
memory so that intimate friends and family could be reached on a moment’s notice
by entering a code string into local hardware. Today with Cloud-based contacts Apps,
those device codes are hidden one layer beneath a roster of proper names or faces, and
once entered into a private database, they are possibly never seen again no matter how
often you activate the spectrum to connect with that person’s associated address or
“phone number.”
The Address layer of The Stack develops through both geographical site subdivision
and the identification of untethered instances out in the ambient wild, and its governance depends on the linking of one to the other and making them mutually communicable. This combination blends physical and virtual systems and sets the stage
for the overlapping of multiple address geographies, some open and some proprietary,
one on top of the other and without necessary resolution (as discussed in relation to
Google and China in the Cloud chapter). At the level of everyday objects and processes,
that proliferation of addressing schemes extends into the tracking of individual commodities through the supply chain, to the tracing of real and virtual data instances
within the City layer, to the enumeration of fictional currencies for online economies,
to the specification of agricultural, ecological, medical, and bacteriological objects of
interest, and so on. Not surprisingly the centralized and decentralized control of these
interlocking systems is a matter of considerable debate. For example, the domain name
system (DNS) and the global Internet addressing system is overseen in general by the
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), which, in principle,
functions as a neutral technical standards body but is sometimes seen, both fairly and
unfairly, as extending US influence over the global development of the Internet and its
digital economies. Because of this, we entertain the possibility of wide-scale alternative
DNS systems, introduced by states or by companies (the .amazon domain name was
recently proposed and rejected for recognition by ICANN, but perhaps in time it will
appear in some way without ICANN’s consent). If some are adopted only locally, the
principle of a single universal Internet addressing geography would be undone. (Is the
price of universality always the acceptance of a totality?) This plurality of addressing
schemes could theoretically result in a flowering of novel forms of identification and
cartography or the proliferation of incompatible schemes and networks walled off from
one another. The mutual opacity between the worlds of different addressing systems
may enable forms of network speciation and diversification by their separation, and
also new hierarchies of who and what can and can’t communicate in certain ways.

Address Layer

197

For the Address layer of The Stack, however, our interest is focused less on “the
Internet” as it exists than on the expanded fields of addressability per se to coordinate
communication between things, whether through a single universal geography or multiple competing systems. We’re interested not just in how the essential procedures of
addressing do more than tally up the digital world as we see it, but also in how they
can allow us (force us) to engage with scales and qualities of communication otherwise
inconceivable. We can understand addressing as a formal system, regardless of what
it is organizing. Addressing depends on the identification of a singularity (the thing,
site, event, however heavy or ephemeral, that is enumerated as a discrete entity), on a
system of bifurcators (the names, hierarchies, and sets that include the singularity as
a member, such as a street name, a postal prefix, or an IP address quadrant), and on
a resolver (a universal or idiosyncratic table that can route messages by matching any
enumerated address string to the proper entity in the world). As we’ll see, this combination can produce several productive accidents for the Address layer of The Stack. These
include the enforcement of social hierarchies based on the capitalization of private
addresses by some actors and an exploitable exposure of addresses for others. In this,
address spoofing and the misidentification and misrecognition of addressable entities
as something other than what they really are can have strategic consequences. The
most interesting accident, however, may be a cracking open of the scope of what ultimately can be (and cannot be) specified as an addressable singularity in the first place.
This will frame the greatest challenges not only to technological infrastructure but to
our conventional understandings of what is and is not available for communication,
human and nonhuman, physical and immaterial. It is there that the material ambition
of The Stack may be most clearly demonstrated.
44. Deep Address
As said, any “thing” that is incorporated into The Stack must be known by it. To be
known, it must be locatable as a discrete entity among all others. To the extent that The
Stack, as megastructure, provides a global and universal architecture for planetary computation, the space of potential location in which any thing may be situated is equally
global and universal. That universality is necessary because the addressed “things” may
be of very different kinds and qualities (an entry in a particular spreadsheet, a light
bulb in a remote street lamp, a single gateway on a single transistor, a component on
an orbiting satellite, or a unique chemical process in a Petri dish). The Address layer of
The Stack organizes this telescoping from a global grid of locations to the specific local
instance of the addressed and back again. This is the ultimate horizon of a truly ubiquitous computing that exceeds the experiential limits of anthropometric and anthropocentric design by enrolling entities into a scope of addressability across and between
natural scales, from the infinitesimal to the astronomic, and across natural tempo,

198

Address Layer

from instantaneous to geologic duration. This is deep address; it is where the scope of
addressability expands to the point of breaking common sense of what is and is not a
sender, a receiver, and message as the theoretical landscape of information promiscuity
explodes.
What has been called “ubiquitous computing” since the 1970s (and will soon simply be called “computing”) refers to an evolutionary transition of computation from
a generic type of equipment object (“this one thing is a computer but that one is not
a computer”) toward a technical environment in which synthetic computation is, like
electricity, a generic property of things in the world. We say that light bulbs, toasters, and
remote controls are electric but not that they are electricity or “electricity machines.”
Instead, for them, electrification is just another physical aspect alongside plastic compounds and steel wire. For better or worse, so too for computation: cars, doors, lights,
window switches, and all forms of significant gateways and networked pebbles become
computational media. On this general computation, Cory Doctorow observes that “the
world we live in today is made of computers. We don’t have cars anymore, we have
computers we ride in; we don’t have airplanes anymore, we have flying Solaris boxes
with a big bucketful of SCADA controllers; a 3D printer is not a device, it’s a peripheral,
and it only works connected to a computer; a radio is no longer a crystal, it’s a generalpurpose computer with a fast ADC and a fast DAC and some software.”6 Sensor nets
and smart surfaces transform whole landscapes into intelligent territories (or remake
their dumbness in new ways). As the ubiquity of computation extends to finer and
finer granularity, smaller and smaller, it enlivens the things of the world (we hope) in
perhaps startling and even animistic ways. The share of traffic dedicated to humanto-human communication (or even human-to-thing) is overwhelmed by tidal waves
of object chatter coming online all around us. As it extends to envelop yet more vast
gestures, the oscillating chatter of stuff that is now given voice only gets denser and
more intricate. Perhaps instead of inaugurating some full-spectrum mastery, our own
attempts to communicate with a ubiquitously computational world become but one
vernacular voice among the object legions.
For such a computational landscape of things to communicate with itself, it must
map and enumerate all the things that can send and receive information, and so provides each with an (at least temporarily) unique address, regardless of what that address
might resolve. As said, that addressability does not replicate the proximity of those
things in the real world (the way a sequential postal address does) but instead organizes them according to a universal indexical simulation that provides a bewilderingly
high resolution of possible addresses and even produces new routing geographies and
locations in its own image. In that it controls the very possibility of communication
between things, the governance of the address becomes more than the management of
an addressing schema; it becomes a governance of the addressee and of the addressable
in general.7 Besides the technological and epistemological complexity, it also suggests

Address Layer

199

possible channels of direct economic relations between points within this vast address
cloud, any single instance also a node of, for example, supply, demand, valuation,
or debt. Consider the 2008 financial crisis. One effect of planetary computation on
economic geography is the virtualization of sovereign currencies into n-dimensional
abstractions and the consequent disturbance in the force of money to represent the
exchange value of commodities, assets, work, and debt. What does money point to?
The ultimate reference of a currency is always mythic (“Gold? Seriously?”), but when
it is reduced to absolute pulses of light, the link between a currency, the value that it
contains, and the thing or process that is exchanged for that currency becomes even
more unwound. Among other things, the financial crisis is a crisis of addressability,
a de-addressing of things, and one that continues consolidating a shift within global
market economics (when not also collapsing them). We can only anticipate what
forms of high weirdness will ensue, as the paired computerization of matter-into-monies (i.e., carbon credits trading, where the value of money is itself measured in carbon)
and monies-into-virtuality (i.e., the light pulses of high-speed trading) continues to
evolve and accelerate.8 New addressing schemes to locate and coordinate instances of
value are multiplying, both as generic currency (bitcoin blockchains) and as platforms
for brokering things-with-value (various sharing economy schemes). At stake in all this
is also the design of the economy of information itself, from the smallest-scale object
or gesture to the largest topological frameworks, and interrelations across scales by
drawing and managing an orthodox map in the form of an address table.9 What gets
to count and to whom, and who profits from merely counting? If one is unaddressed,
then one cannot speak or be spoken to, and so in turn, resistance to official addressable geography and its enforcements characterizes so many histories of resistance to
authorities wishing to consolidate their power by consolidating ability to nominate
space.10
But deep address is not only a mechanism for the capture of what exists and a formalization of its space of juxtaposition; it is also, as conceived, a medium for the creative composition of those relations, positions, and interrelations. It is a machine for
mapping states and procedures of interrelation that are as ancient as they are ephemeral. If we were to think of interaddressability in this way (and even abstracted from
its integration with planetary computation as the Address layer of The Stack), we see
that its practices are analogous to the intertextuality that links and delinks written
texts, one to another, in varying scales of reference, quotation, association, and categorization. “Textuality is massive addressability,” claims digital humanites scholar,
Michael Witmore.11 By this, he means that any text provides “multiple provisional
scales of unity” (inscriptive, semantic, intertextual, formal) and that such “levels of
scale and provisional objectness are as historically-phenomenologically determined as
technical.”12 Any layer of addressability, internal or external to what is individuated as
a single text, is then so open to alternative logics of subdivision, categorization, and

200

Address Layer

direct and indirect association that any one coagulation of addressability is always
provisional if also historically overdetermined. This allegorical provisionality is what
allows a reader to produce new momentary conceptual framings of a local instance
within a text or an association between multiple texts, within or across logical sets
on the fly, so to speak. That simultaneous decoding and production of intertextuality
is an essential task (and risk) of readership.13 With deep address, that process is augmented by a platform for the real numerical explication of such provisional intensities and
the communication of them into a global network of mutual, formal, technical interaddressability for which the trace (i.e., any writing) is made durable and directly available outside itself and a “reader’s” experience of it. The addressable space could range
from the molecules in printed ink, to an individual letter on a page, to a complete
sentence, to scenes or passages, to a citation or thematic link to another passage that
is written about it, to metacommentary on that theme, and so on. Each instance could
be traced in different ways by different people for different purposes, all of which in
turn could also be addressed over again, with their queries themselves searchable: data
and metadata, text and reading, object and event. All fold into origami-esque fields of
interpretation, referencing, and mapping. Thereby, any local address no longer comes
and goes in the same way. It now leaves a durable marker on the “text” (any site,
object, event, person) such that it can be reconstituted later and can be incorporated
into a reframed public life of that text. In this case (the one most familiar to the digital
humanities), deep address represents a kind of second-order intertextuality, an artificial superimposition of a linking mechanism into techniques of reading, quotation,
archiving, analysis, archaeology, and so on. However, once again, the wider interest
for The Stack is not only as a mapping or interpretation tool, even for leaving bread
crumb trails through deconstruction or tracing cognition in real time, but as itself a
first-order compositional medium through which gestures of nomination, measuring,
localization, linking, delinking, association—in other words, articulation—are developed with due virtuosity so as to produce new creations in their own right, built of
nothing perhaps but the addresses that codify and arrange each gesture for others to
sample and appreciate.
45. Objects in The Stack
Before we consider the terms for that kind of compositional exploration, let’s revisit
the more familiar, visible, human-centric, utilitarian program for ubiquitous computation developed for an “Internet of Things.” One could be excused for assuming that
the future of computing involves primarily the proliferation of calculation and networking into domestic appliances, so that rolling waves of suburban kitchens may be
refashioned as smart spaces and interactive habitats. However, this forever stale vision
predates general-use computing by many years, and Architecture has had better plans

Address Layer

201

for information spaces for at least as long. For example, in the 1960s, the definition
of architecture as a container and conveyer of information was central to Christopher
Alexander’s project, while the reprogramming of Apollo-era cities as a lattice for interactive media technologies was sketched out by Cedric Price, Archigram, Reyner Banham, and others. Before MIT’s Media Lab, Nicholas Negroponte founded Architecture
Machine Group, which focused on the problems of human-computer interaction at
the environmental scale and what came in time to be called “information architecture.”14 Today, as suggested, many speculative information space design questions are
not only coordinated around building automation but also for the conjuring of exotic
materials such as smart dust, a generic name for different kinds of millimeter- to nanometer-scale sensor arrays with ultralow power budgets connected wirelessly and which
gather hyperlocal data as they swerve. Some of these perhaps even also in turn react
back on their microcosmos and our macrocosmos—what Vernor Vinge calls “smart
motes with effectors.”15
Other programs focus on the design of the spatial, temporal, and semantic relations between physical and data objects. Bruce Sterling’s influential Shaping Things
introduced the term SPIME to designate the hybrid profile of an object, as accumulated all the way from its virtual design, to sourcing, to assembly, through its use and
consumption, and its ultimate disassembly back into entropic matter. He situates
this at the end of a schematic history of artificial objects, from artisanal craft to postFordism, and suggests that the SPIME is the modality of objects defined by the conjunction of computer-aided design, pervasive big data, computational logistics, global
sourcing, and waste materials management. It is less the object as melted into the
computational solvent, but one that talks to the platform through the long arc of its
conception and assemblage, oscillating between virtual and tangible states and shedding metadata all along the way. This “thing” is ultimately indistinguishable from (if
not reducible to) the traces that it produces about itself and its various relations with
the world that brought it into being.16 The SPIME is then a kind of meta-diagram that
precedes the object’s manufacture, couches its real physical life in the world, and outlasts its recycling; it is the “thing” defined as an artificial temporal instance of digitalphysical relations from beginning to end. The politics of the SPIME motivates interest
in making global supply chains deeply transparent, and in principle more accountable and sustainable. The hope is that if any interested User can “read” the complete
biography of a thing, measure all of the conditions of its appearance, use, and disappearance now captured as extensible metadata, then the politics of its chemical and
mineral origins (as discussed in Earth chapter) or factory labor conditions, or nutritional authenticity, or post-use death cycle might become more legible currencies
of everyday material culture. From other highly controlled perspectives, such transparencies are common in global supply chains but are guarded proprietary sources
of competitive information, not public platforms (see the discussion in the Cloud

202

Address Layer

chapter on Amazon and Walmart). But as object fashioning also moves from far-flung
extraction-design-factory-distribution chains to scenarios associated with networked
3D printing, then the public constitution of the thing as a traceable data shell is perhaps both more apparent and more salient for end Users. Every time that the schematic instructions of physical object are downloaded and rendered into atoms, that
transformation and the relevant information about who, what, where, when, how,
and why that took place might be added to the cumulative “objectivity” of an object
that is itself already a networked entity. Given the disruptive potential of a tectonic
shift toward the economies of additive manufacturing, including the decentralization
of the “industrial Internet,” the related control and governance issues are uncertain.
They might range from the dangerously annoying (such as digital-rights management
schemes for tangible objects crippled by remote rentier platforms attempting to collect royalties and fees on forks, lamps, and chairs)17 to the annoyingly dangerous (the
widespread distribution of tools of mayhem, and new forms of virus spread through
distributed object networks, either a real biological virus18 or physical malware or
combinations thereof19).
For any human or nonhuman User to locate any “instance” (physical or virtual)
within this expanded address field requires not only that it has a predictable and available location, but that the career of that thing and the history of its relations must in
fact be queryable. Internet search has largely focused on the sorts of data that are publicly available at IPv4 addresses, namely web pages, but both the Internet of Things and
the more comprehensive theoretical SPIME spaces suggest radically expanded search
domains (and deep addresses exponentially more so). These range from the prosaic
(Google “my car keys” to find them under the couch) to the barely fathomable (“search
the contagion distribution of the RNA in the virus that laid me up”). Just as for today’s
web pages, search providers are eager to provide more direct services built directly into
query results themselves by predictively interpreting the intention of the query and providing its likely solution along with tools for the User to accomplish that intention as
part of the search result. These are techniques sometimes associated with the semantic
web, for which structured data are linked and associated to allow instrumental relations
with other data, making the web as a whole more programmable by Users. Through various combinations of open or proprietary exigetics of data, and perhaps a sequence of
application programming interfaces (APIs), a query entered as “book me a ticket to New
York” can activate a series of secondary inquiries to calendars, banks, flight schedules,
airline databases, bank accounts, and so on and, through this, initiate the cascading
programming resulting in that booking. For this, to search is also to program. Such tidy
consumer use cases require enormously difficult standardizations of interoperability
between competitive services (not to mention beyond-Esperanto level standardization
of all Users’ conceptual taxonomies). The goal of linking data into semantically relevant and accessible structures so that “search” would also provide more actionable

Address Layer

203

results, and in turn allowing queries to program those results for specific ends, remains
compelling for search engines, if less so for individual down-service-stream providers,
such as airlines and banks, which see their business absorbed into a handful of search
platforms.20 By comparison, physical search may be based on a similar tissue of interrelation between addressable entities—in this case, a mix of physical things and data
of interest—and might be a necessary condition of a really viable Internet of Things
or SPIME space. The designation of semantic relations between objects, according to
some disinterested (or extremely interested and capitalized) graph of addresses and
their interlocking sets, might reorganize what we take to be the natural proximities
of one thing to one another and introduce another map (even topology) of queryable
association between them. This resulting platform might provide for the programming
and counterprogramming of the resulting object landscapes and event graphs, putting them to direct use, as well as providing secondary metadata about their efficacy
or accuracy. Just as most of the traffic on the Internet today is machine-to-machine,
or at least machine generated, so too a semantic web of things21 would be correlated
less by the cognitive dispositions or instrumental intentions of human Users, but those
of “objects” and other instances within the larger meta-assemblage all querying and
programming one another without human intervention or supervision. In the hype,
it’s easy to forget that the Internet of Things is also an Internet for Things (or for any
addressable entity, however immaterial).
Control of this multitude of chattering things would represent enormous power, and
the danger of overcentralization paired with a monetized opacity of data flows is real.
The capture of the “general intellect” by search and other mechanisms of “cognitive
capitalism” is one lens through which to imagine a future in which tracing objective
knowledge about the appearance and disappearance of material culture is a proprietary narrative.22 At the same time, Internet of Things scenarios that prioritize human
Users sensing and interacting with their responsive habitats, as masters of the data that
appear in their midst, divert discussions of the politics of ubiquitous computing toward
an overly local frame of reference within a larger landscape of humans and nonhuman associations. Among the most thoughtful perspectives on this problem is that of
designer and programmer, Usman Haque. In 2011, he helped coordinate a drafting of
an “Internet of Things Bill of Rights,” which included the rights of “people to own the
data they (or their ‘things’) create,” of “people” to “keep their data private,” of “people” to “own the data someone else creates for them,” of “people” to “use and share
their data however they want,” and so on.23 All of those enumerated are strong and
sensible principles, and the beneficent blossoming of ubiquitous computation would
be more assured should they be widely adopted. But one can’t help notice that as a
model governance of a landscape largely populated by nonhuman addressees, every
sentence in this list of rights begins with the word “people” and refers to the rights of
individual human Users to retain individuated sovereignty over flows of data that may

204

Address Layer

very decisively exceed the boundaries of any one person’s practical domain. Given that
so much Internet of Things traffic will be object-to-object and that any object may
directly affect and be affected by many people at once or over time (some owners, some
Users, some passers-by), how can anyone be sure what “person” we are talking about?
By articulating the terms of governance in the terms of individual rights, we limit how
design might govern in advance the emergence of addressable computational-material
communication to a narrow, even parochial subsection of invested Users who happen
to resemble this kind of profile.
Instead, we also need to consider a politics from the perspective of the addressed
looking out at the world. Because each object is understood not only as a discrete entity
but as a durable intersection of multiple ancestor and descendant objects, events, and
processes, all of which are inscribed and archived in some sort of available “cloud” of
traces, a mature Address layer infrastructure would also generate second- and thirdorder layers of metadata about metadata produced by the logistical intersections of new
and old objects, coming and going. Like a text, any object can contain a multitude of
contingent layers of logistical trace, including its location in open or proprietary supply
chain models, as one instance in a network of metadata, traces, and relations with its
own semantic meanings held in relation and association with others. “It” is contained
inevitably within multiple sets of structured data at once, each set perhaps overlapping, perhaps aware of the work of jurisdictional categorization done by other sets and
perhaps not. Any parameter of the object is articulated by an addressing of it as a nameable entity, as a site of interconnected relations, or as a producer of metadata about
itself and those relations, but its appearance as a “virtually discrete” thing, a fleeting
event, or a cipher for networked commodity flows is fixed at a specific location within
a global addressable space so that “it” can say things to other things and other things
can say things to it. Once more, for any trace to be visible, it must be enumerated and
enunciated, and as these inscriptions for the virtual object are instances within a universal space of trace enumeration, they are addresses. This addressability of the object
(or sub-object, or relation of assemblage, or SPIME, or event of association, or trace,
or commodity life cycle phase) zooms between spatial and temporal scales, gaining
complexity exponentially as data and metadata for second- and third-order relations
accumulate. This ecology of proliferating data points generated by and about the flows
of material cultures seems to aspire toward a beyond human-scale universal architecture for addressing the qualities of relations between all parameters. Seen through deep
address, the ultimate politics of the Internet of Things hinges on the dynamic between
the open universality of such a platform architecture and its global closure as a total
geography. The abyssal scope of this architecture, its exponential layers of relations
upon relations, and its essential position within The Stack, may be the most important
intersection between the SPIME motif and deep address, and may be the most integral
accident of the Address layer.

Address Layer

205

46. Addressability and Technique
For the Address layer of The Stack, different design programs might want only to deploy
or disassemble existing Internet address architectures, but should instead proceed from
the procedural terms of addressability itself. Some are universal, and others are specific
to addressing within computational networks. According to Saul Kripke’s philosophy
of language, we first point at something, and only then do we learn qualities about
it. Designation precedes description.24 Internet addressing systems also describe the
world first by pointing at things, differentiating them, only later filling in content for
them, and as they point toward unlike things, processes, and actions, this designation
becomes a generic technology.25 Laura Denardis describes the essential functions of
Internet addressability according to four variables: universality (the address must be a
required common denominator for access to the network), identification (the address
must constitute a truly unique identifier such that no two things can share an address),
exposure (addresses cannot be encrypted and must be visible to others), and, disinterestedness (the address is unconcerned with the content of any message sent to or from it).
To locate Address as a layer within a planetary computational landscape, we could add
several more of our qualifications. Among these is presence; whether something has or
does not have an address has the functional effect of allowing it to exist or not exist
within a world of experience external to itself and extrinsic to the generic designation
of its address. If something that has an address is addressable, it is present, and stripping something of its address, or turning off its address, erases it from that world. This
is address as a technique of identity and precondition for social performance. Second,
addresses provide a space of relationality between things that exceeds the relations they
might already possess as natural objects. Wine would still “relate to its jug,” as Heidegger intoned,26 but as one node in a flat universal network, it could also relate to, and
exchange real Shannon information with, a helicopter, a book in a library, or someone’s kidney stone. Flatness here refers not to ontology or the withdrawal of objects,
but to their functional communication and their mechanically unwithdrawn relations.27 These relations could include the identification of something with an address
that previously had no name or any normal discrete quality as a natural object for any
User, including either a tangible thing or an intangible condition between things. This
“word” (the four letters to the immediate left, in quotes) in this sentence could have an
address, but so could the immaterial fact that I wrote it, or that at a given moment, it
is in my proximity. The fact that you just read that word could have an address. These
relations, these traces without mass, are equally addressable and so equally “things” in
the program of a universal deep address. What would relations say to other relations?
By providing an address to a massless relation and making it a source or receiver of
further information, alien worlds perhaps come into relief (if not for us). As heretofore
unseen or unnamed relations are made clear and new concepts about their relations

206

Address Layer

are superimposed on them, then things that already possessed common names and certain identifiable relations are also now seen in new light. The everyday taxonomy and
categorization of the world might be scrambled. Things reorder themselves according
to distant logics of proximity and come to belong to different sets and categories than
before. Once recategorized, they could also be valued differently, revealed as crucial
or dismissed as irrelevant for unexpected reasons. In this regard deep address is also a
mereological technology.
Third, addresses, in plural networks, produce topology. Whereas the nested hierarchies of postal addressing (e.g., name, building, street, city) refer to specific locations within a natural geography, such that the physical proximity or distance of one
addressee versus another might be deduced from their addresses, Internet addressing
follows no such geographic conventions, and peer-to-peer networking is all but agnostic as to the territorial origins and outcomes of packet flows. Instead, the accumulation
of Internet addresses in certain areas, such as New York and Palo Alto, and the density of relations between those accumulations produce durable patterns of information
communicated through the world.28 Globally our regular networks of bundled addressors and addresses wear grooves into information channels, sometimes aligning with
geopolitical borders and interests and sometimes perforating them. Sometimes these
grooves are a deliberate regulation, such as a walled garden enveloping a platform’s
Users or a secure military organization, and sometimes they are accidents of common
cause or of the expediencies of packet routing, which can generate new hyperbolic
geographies in their own image. Fourth, address produces an effect of generic subjectivization within the network, such that anything, regardless of what a particular address
actually resolves, human or nonhuman, big or small, is possibly both an addressee and
an addressor within network space. Not only does it have presence, but it can also be
spoken to and it can speak, and it can be spoken for. This goes for anything and anyone. Importantly, in this generic universality, there can be a dehierarchicalization of
participants, putting everything on a similar level that ultimately can amplify eccentric
pathways of evolution in the relationships of information at play in the world.29 Flowers and bees already communicate, but what do flowers have to “say” to birds if they, or
sub- or supercomponents of each, could exchange messages directly? And finally, fifth,
as already mentioned in relation to intertextuality, address space allows for retroactive
traceability between lines of communication and events of differentiation that have
taken place. Such artifacts may in turn be themselves addressed and made into aggregate objects for subsequent chains and networks. That possibility of infinite recursion,
for which any connection later becomes an address, and which is itself addressed and
so on, is discussed further below.
Each of these speaks to three general principles (which can be mapped onto or across
singularity, bifurcator, and resolver). Address provides identity (through “designation”),
address provides exchange, and address provides recursion and the capacity to govern

Address Layer

207

the conditions of those exchanges and their traces. Whether addresses are resolved
as parcels of binary data, sovereign currencies, or quantities of extinguished carbon,
each of these could in principle be enumerated by one or several universal addressing
procedure platforms linking addressors and addressees up and down the layers of The
Stack: User to Cloud to Earth. The design brief of the Address layer revolves around such
scenarios and all their effects and accidents.
47. IPv6
In practice, ubiquitous computing and the identification of digital objects depend on
multiple unlike schemes. There is no single globally unique identifier (GUID) system
addressing all networked things across macro and microscopic scales. Explicit and
implicit in each scheme is a means not only to describe and designate a certain functional world but also to program one through a particular grammar of connection.
Some track homology between real and virtual objects (i.e., the Tour Eiffel in Paris to
the Tour Eiffel avatar online in SecondLife, or an instance in a database to a real toy in a
shipping container somewhere in mid-Pacific transit). Others, such as MQTT (message
queue telemetry transport), broker signals between more local networks of the Internet
of Things, and in Hollywood, EIDR (entertainment identifier registry) tries to identify
and stores information for the tracking of unique copyrighted content across multiple
work flows and consumer channels (it is but one of several systems of digital object
identifiers supervised by the International DOI Foundation).30 For the Internet at large,
universal platforms for generic addressability might in principle enumerate anything,
but they are not infinite. On the contrary, they are—perhaps unfortunately, perhaps
fortunately—a finite and tightly governed resource. Internet addressing is based on
protocols designed in the early 1970s, a time when it was thought safe to presume
that the total number of network-addressable computers would be rather small, not
conceivably more than a few billion. For the most part, IPv4 has been used to address
almost everything connected to the Internet. There is, however, a problem with IPv4
and its ability to map a fast-growing Internet and a thriving ubiquitous computing
ecology: all possible addresses are now allocated. IPv4 is a 32-bit address space and so
has a maximal capacity of approximately 4.3 billion addresses, far fewer than even one
per person. There are not nearly enough numbers in the address space to enumerate
all the individual “things” that a robust future of ubiquitous computing would require,
even with subnet routing and swapping addresses to and from things on the fly. In
2011 the final blocs of 16 million addresses were allocated to the five global (regional
internet registries (RIRs). Readers can be excused if they have never heard of the transnational bodies responsible for allocating the addresses that provide address and access
to the global Internet: AfriNIC (Africa), ARIN (which covers North America) APNIC
(Asia-Pacific), LACNIC (Latin America), and RIPE (which covers Europe).

208

Address Layer

Pondering the significance of the Internet’s becoming “full,” I was interested in
seeing a map of the global address space. Indeed in the long history of cartography,
of world maps going back to the Greeks, Westphalian, and Mercatur projections, and
medieval Islamic geographies like Muhammad al-Adrisi’s Tabula Rogerina, would the
cosmogram of a now-full IPv4 address space perhaps compare on some small level? I
was surprised, then, that was readily available. So in collaboration with the San Diego
Supercomputing Center, Sam Kronick and I made one to satisfy our curiosity, which
you can view online at the site associated with this book (thestack.org or bratton.info/
thestack). You’ll note two things right away. First, although the biggest presumed growth
of User population is in South America, Asia, and Africa, it is North America and Europe
that control many more addresses than those continents. Second, one whole quadrant (totaling hundreds of millions of addresses) is claimed by private and government
actors, such as Apple, Microsoft, Halliburton, the US Department of Defense, the UK
Ministry of Defense, Merck, and Lilly. One new economy of scarcity is addressability,
and existing solutions to expand the address space are unlikely to be implemented as
quickly as they could be. There is hard power in soft addresses as the power of the map
is the power to qualify movement, and the top left corner of the IPv4 map is beachfront
real estate.31 But ultimately this scarcity is artificial and technologically unnecessary,
and it has even distorted the structure of the Internet itself.32 An original vision for the
Internet platform was for decentralized “state-full edges” in which every node could
peer with any other. “Distributed state meant that adding nodes also added capability
and that ownership and power stayed distributed as the Net grew. ... Unfortunately that
chronic shortage of addresses contracted the web, shifting the definition of ‘edge’ from
the device you are looking at to the ISP (Internet Service Provider) it’s connected to.”33
By contrast in an alternative postscarcity economy of addressing, with every little node
also a server (hosting, sending, receiving, processing, sensing), then the physics of centralization and platforms may evolve quite differently, with communication flowing
mote-to-mote, mountain-to-mountain, and mote-to-mountain, for example. Toward
that, what is needed is not just another way to number the network but something that
functions like a new network emerging through an enumerative infrastructure that is
more correspondent to the polyvalent and multitemporal scales of The Stack.
One technical solution to the artificial scarcity of addressability is IPv6, a 128-bit
address replacement for IPv4, proposed originally in the mid-1990s. When would IPv6
run out? If you were to divide the total number of possible addresses within a 128-bit
space by 7 billion people, it would be able to theoretically allocate approximately 5 x
1028 addresses per person. That is an genuinely incomprehensible number; it is orders
of magnitude more than Avogadro’s number (>1 mole of addresses). You could, if so
inclined, assign over 4 billion unique IPv6 addresses to every known star in the universe. Everyone, with his or her personal allocation, could assign a unique address to
each grain of sand on Earth’s beaches; we could give each cell in every human body 2 x

Address Layer

209

1013 addresses, and so on. However, it must be said that the full IPv6 address space can
enumerate many orders of magnitude fewer items than the possible number of books
in Jorge Luis Borges’s “Library of Babel.”34 How ubiquitous is the ubiquitous computation? If you were to try to assign an individual address to 1028 things over the course
of your life, you would have to work down to the level of individual molecules, numbering things at a scale below natural perception, doling out addresses for individual
letters in books, hairs on heads, blood cells, specks of dust.35 I was interested in experimenting with that fine granularity, trying to get a picture of it in my mind so that it
might be more easily understandable. How small could one “write” an IPv6 address? I
would need the most fine-tipped writing tools invented to find out. In collaboration
with the Nano3 lab at Calit2, we wrote a single IPv6 address (3ffe:1900:4545:3:200:f8ff
:fe21:67cf) with an electron lithography beam into a silicon wafer and photographed it
with the scanning electron microscope (see the image in the online companion to this
chapter). The address in our picture is 10 micrometers in width, about the size of a red
blood cell. The lines of each digit are about 50 nanometers in thickness.
But nano-objectivity is only part of the story. Recall that deep addressability would
allow for the identification not only of things with mass but also of relations between
things. Once again, each letter in the sentence you are reading right now could have
an address, but your act of reading of each one of them, those immaterial relations
between two things, it and you, could be addressed as well, and from this graph and set
traces proliferate and become techniques of a new geography. One can address both a
discrete thing and the abstract reverberating envelope of relations around it that could
extend toward infinity. Put differently, deep addressability includes not only discrete
entities but also multiple levels of abstraction, as well as the traces of those entities and
in turn the abstractions we hold for those—not just addressable nouns but addressable
verbs, events, and allegories. While it’s unlikely that I could exhaust 1028 addresses for
familiar physical things over the course of my life span, I could easily exhaust that
many relations of relations of relations of relations. I could spend all my addresses
in an instant of we were to extend relationality all the way down into the abyss. The
exhaustion of any full allocation of deep address exists therefore somewhere between
never and instantaneously, and the measure of that vast middle ground is essential to
the design brief of the Address layer of The Stack.36 Whereas the traditional Internet of
Things situates a network of physical objects, the full Address layer would include all
these but also concepts, events, procedures, and memes, addressable at a common level
through a generic protocol.37 While there are real barriers to a global IPv6 implementation, some technological, others economic, and others political, we should assume
that for The Stack, some platform for deep address will in time enumerate things and
events at a similar or even more granular scale, giving way to disorienting associations between micro- and macrocosmos, linking, delinking, and blurring across natural
scales. Besides IPv6, Bitcoin allows for 2256 possible private keys and 2160 possible private

210

Address Layer

addresses. Perhaps its hash architecture can be made to not only to map virtual quanta
of “value” but actual things as well at the scale required by a global economy, or a parallel economy. (Is the “coin” the “address” and the value in the mesh of addressees? If so
then the cost of addressing of anything and everything may be prohibitive without the
introduction of some new incentive for settling the blockchain consensus.) All that is
solid doesn’t melt so much as it becomes fuzzy and spastic. In this, Address layer technologies of universal addressability point not only to assemblages that exist but to the
media with which to compose those to come.38
48. Communication and Composition
Design can only grope with the implications of an Address layer that meets matter at
its own scales, and surely, unfortunately, it will do so initially through a demand that
everything must appear and be disclosed to the cartographic militation of logistical
necessity. But the geographies of communication are never and can never be limited
to fixing things according to path and place. Things in the world always communicate
and exchange information: DNA, RNA, and hair follicles disturbed by sound waves and
sunlight exchanging information with celluloid film, for example. Things inform one
another in specific ways, and this specificity is how Michel Serres defines communication as the work of Hermes. Adjacent to this, I see addressability not just as an absolute
logistics but as a transalphabetic compositional platform. The logic of deep address is
not only to identify discrete things and capture them into the fold by tagging them
but also to designate with some manner of practical durability the ephemeral, immaterial, even metaphorical associations between instances, and thereby framing them
as addressable events and passing them along as messages. By one perspective, this is
what poetry does with written words. Its facility is not in the naturalistic explication of
things as they are, but in the ongoing demonstration of language’s ability to contend
with the affective contradictions of semantic abstraction. It might do this through the
alignment of ideas that, by their positioning just so, are arranged for us as the trace of
an alternative perception, or through the fixing of symbols on a surface that, through
the poet’s cunning alienation of our interpretation, disclose startling truths about the
materials of writing, sounding, reading, and so on. Similarly for deep address, in the
assignment of a specific sequence of addressing identities to a precisely chosen web of
immaterial associations now made into singularities (a certain view out the window,
the falling of an anonymous bit of debris, one moment in the crashing together of
dangerous alloys like a car and a driver), we render a composition built of nothing but
a stream of applicable addresses resolving (somehow) to the signified arrangement of
concepts, proximities, and appointments. The more difficult assignment for design is
to compose relations within a framework that exceeds both the conventional appearances of forms and the provisional human context at hand, and so pursuing instead

Address Layer

211

less the materialization of abstract ideas into real things than the redirection of real
relations through a new diagram.
In expanding the space of potential addressability, the protocol interfaces between
any two things that could be encapsulated into a provisional incorporation claim for
them a position within a territorial apparatus. Even so there can’t be one single necessary relationship between a comprehensive computational addressing mechanism,
such as the Address layer of The Stack, and the given distribution of things in the
world. There is no one matrix of correspondence between a primary planetary plane
and a second artificial machinic layer. Instead, between the two are qualified simulations and countersimulations that always flow both ways. Address is not simply a
virtual layer constructed at scale so that it could overlay the first plane, like Borges’s
one-to-one scale map, causing the original geography of positions to fade, crackle, and
blow away. Rather, the interlacing territories blend and perforate, signifying within the
other, feeding back and forth until each is interior to the other. Through addressability,
the linking of matter and information otherwise disconnected is also a reinscribing of
the boundaries of potential aggregations and a restructuring of their amalgamations
and divisions through a recognition of their conditions and dependencies as a formal
“haecceity” (after Charles Sanders Peirce). The correlation between an address and an
addressee puts into question the stability of referent, which can be temporary, slow,
or fast. As such, the proper unit for deep address wouldn’t be an Internet of Things,
which suggests durable appliances beeping at each other, but an Internet of Haecceities, addressable specificities that might name particularities as they come and go,
even before and after they exist for individual Users.39
For The Stack, the compositional logic of addressing is not contained only within
the Address layer but links operations up and down from the local to global and back
again. The Stack could be said to compose lines between addressees located elsewhere,
as the Address layer provides identification and rendering as “present” whatever might
be available for delineation or containment. Address is like a valve through which the
nomos of the Cloud cleaves subdivisions smaller than the geographic, and where it
draws landscape-scale calculable interiors. At the Earth and Cloud layers, platform service empires organize open and closed populations of addressable Users, sensors, data
sets, and interaction platforms, among others, from which they absorb and recirculate
patterns of value. The worlds that the Cloud layer provides is limited to what it can
address and be addressed by. At the City layer, Address augments urban intensities of
activity, attention, circulation, simultaneity, segmentation. That addition, where avenues, apertures, and avatars are gathered into tacit micro-stacks, doesn’t (necessarily)
override local sites and their embedded rhythms, but it can compress and expand them
by linking each interface with distant events. Above, at the Interface layer, interactive
screens and programmable objects structure circuits of cause and effect undertaken
through their summary diagrams, but can only present, frame, and instrumentalize

212

Address Layer

what it is possible to address and summon. Only then are the gymnastic accumulation
of traces that outline the User organized as a set of addressable positions, and only then
can she affect and be affected by The Stack. Like pixels resolving into a portrait image
with given distance, the pattern of instances that constitute the biography of the User
for The Stack is a mosaic of addressable haecceities, and zoomed out further, the encapsulated User is also in turn another one of these resolved addressees.
49. Absolute Incommunication
Another way of conceptualizing the design problematic of this sort of assembly is in
symbolic artifacts and how they come to seemingly absorb traces of memory and significance that are imparted to them through use. Whether by genealogical possession
or through ritual, repeated use, and iconic significance, simple objects are a repository of intentions and sometimes are thought to be haunted by them. Whole societies
organize around pilgrimages to such haunted objects. Deep address might also serve
to materialize absorbed traces of emotional baggage as explicit information in and
through the objects they mark. The limit of what the thing can “remember” about its
intersubjective relations with the world (e.g., affective, geochemical, temporal) is also
what can be made calculable and sensible for it. Perhaps those memories are part of
how searches about searches for something introduce significance through their recursion. As more things, events, and things are addressed, the social relations of mutual
interest between haecceities are themselves transposed into addressable clusters and
empirically queryable entities; they are addresses about addresses. These may spawn
addressable networks of metadata that spawn addressable meta-metadata, all of which
require visualization tools to make them sensical to human Users. And so things that
materially absorb and communicate the conditions of their appearance, and the installations of people and things along the same plane of such a network, are a challenge
to our ethical, political, aesthetic stance toward the dignity of both. Marx famously
diagnosed capitalism’s confused employment of people as if they were things and the
assignment of magical agencies to objects. We know full well that capitalist economic
relations drive and are driven by a productive rationality that renders all components
according to their most apparently efficient conditions of production and circulation so
as to maximize the surplus realized in their transactional intercommunication. Logistics understands flatness quite well, and this is also the good news.40 The challenge
is unwinnable on humanist terms, and I am not convinced that any “parliament” of
things can govern this maelstrom.41 Instead I would hope that a strongly ubiquitous
computation would help to implode the sentimental parameters of brute humanism
toward an alternative and more rigorous materialism that extends ethical programs
outward by demanding empathetic recognition of ourselves in networked matter as coaddressees. That said, we do not require anything like deep address to realize that our

Address Layer

213

temporary condition as bags of absolutely secular chemistry is also a seat of empathy
and solidarity, but it might help.
Who or what could organize universal addressing platforms and distribute their
rights and regulations, especially now? Anthropocenic economic axioms lean everything toward an imperative of connection, to link one market with another, one location with another, one gesture with another, and to capture all things under the rubric
of universal exchange where they might communicate without interference, friction,
noise, distance, or delay. Its capture and transmission of energy (e.g., physical, geographic, cognitive, chemical) is also, if not essentially, a relay and mediation of these
forms as information (their storage, calculation, transmission). From the perspective
of deep address, these economies are but one local site of a more comprehensive congregation of reactions.42 The ultimate interest of this prehensile vortex is a white hot
absolute communication, as means and end in itself. We have no idea how to govern in
this context and will likely fall back on the structural compulsion to transparency and
an enforced necessity of appearance, everything summoned past the threshold of the
pornographic. For The Stack, appearance may already be “compulsory,” as nothing is
couched within its architecture without prior nomination of its presence and identity
(and its deformation and alterity). This mandate is similar to the function of money
as the mediator of universal equivalence between things and actions, which guarantees their appearance one to the other according to that reductive exchangeability.
We might then anticipate a full financialization of addressability whereby hoarding
and speculating on the capacity to address things and events is itself a commodity
with global value. However, while the Address layer contributes to The Stack’s totality
through this compulsory cartography in which anything unaddressed cannot have
formal presence and everything past, present, and future must be addressed, it is not
necessary that they are representable through a single master perspective. That is, while
the universal appetite of deep address appears as a totally synchronic space, an atonal
closed field (an atemporal zero-sum geography, the ultimate walled garden), and so
invites reflexive reactions of resistance, strategic opacity, and lines of flight, the totality
is far more fragile and unpredictable than we might wish or fear.43
We can then summarize two basic conditions that we will want to bounce off one
another until they crack. The first is algorithmic logic in the service of a ferocious
autophagic efficiency that characterizes the myopia of the post-Fordist aesthetics of
logistics. The second is that the individuation and virtualization of particulate substance into a self-transparent computational material through standardized indexes
of nested relations would become a prerequisite for the unrestrained financialization
of matter, living and nonliving. But not only is the totality of The Stack itself deeply
unstable, it’s not clear that its abyssal scope of addressability and its platform for the
proliferation of near-infinite signifiers within a mutable finite space are actually correspondent with the current version of Anthropocenic capitalism. Concurrent to its

214

Address Layer

immediate programs, deep address also distributes a mesh over existing supply chains
that has the potential to destabilize their closed hub-and-spoke topologies. The valorization of the node within a decentralized network provides to it a certain degree of
autonomy to form new edges on its own without the permissive provision from a central authority, market, or provider. The apparently irreducible plane of the addressable
landscape begins to percolate with odd links and “conversations” between unpredictable pairings of sender and receiver. Organic conspiracies blossom in our midst, and
these accidents are part of the unpredictability of platforms. Deep address demands
appearance, but appearance to what? Toward what forum is it a forensic medium? How
many utterly incongruent territories can evolve through this platform, one layered on
top of the other, speaking completely different languages, deaf to one another’s claims
on anything? There is no reason that the same object might not have a million different addresses for a million different schemes, most of which might not even be aware
of the existence of the other and need never be. In this, the radical transparency of
utter appearance becomes but one worldly immediacy, within the space of a particular
addressing territory that may be illiterate of others and invisible to them. While any
haecceity is obligated to appear to its own semantic references and in this is given both
subjectivity and subjugation, it is also free to enter into relations with others that enroll
it in exotic extrinsic economies. This potential blessing of drift toward alien incommunication is along with the very abyssality of deep address itself, a most productive
accident of the Address layer, and one we would do well to explore.
50. Distortion and Genesis
As indicated in the first chapter, each layer of The Stack prioritizes the structural ideal
of an independent technology, and like all other sufficient technologies, it generates its own integral accidents. In turn, each layer in conjunction with other layers
of The Stack generates the interweaving and composite accidents of The Stack itself
as a metatechnology. The logic of absolute communication for which any haecceity
must appear to a common, commanding network platform is a utopian gathering of
all into one (the first hint of totality and totalitarianism blurring). But in that guise, it
is just that, a utopian projection of a master perspective from the heart of algorithmic
capital, and like any other utopia, its purity in principle is also its fragility in practice.
Consider the performance piece, Value Added (2012), by Nobutaka Aozaki, in which he
takes a single can of Del Monte corn to multiple supermarkets and rebuys it over and
over again. “The single can of corn has been re-bought from 100 supermarkets for a
total of $107.42 (as of December 30, 2012).”44 The UPC barcode on the side of the can
is a present-day ancestor of deep object addressability, but it can address not this one
particular can of corn but can communicate only that the object in hand it is a member of the set “Del Monte cans of corn.”45 Once the barcode is shown to a laser and

Address Layer

215

then to an inventory database, its printed information is translated into a price, and
the fact of its purchase in turn demands and activates its replacement through a supply chain from store shelf to farm and back again. Aozaki’s can is an archaic prototype
of the deep address haecceity, and his simple maneuver to multiply its moment of
addressable translation one hundred times over suggests at least two lessons. First, any
haecceity can be addressed multiple times by interested addressing territories, each
of which need not have any knowledge of the fact that others have already claimed
this thing. Second, when in the future that universal object identifier is not a dumb
barcode but an active online address and its resolver is something more ambient than
a fixed-in-place laser scanner, then that haecceity’s identity can be spoofed as easily
as any IP-networked computer can be today. In this regard, Aozaki’s work should be
seen not only as a performance of repetition and ritual and the failure of the object to
retain its official memory, but also as a smart object hack that doesn’t require any endUser software reprogramming. When IP-networked haecceities are not just anthropometric objects but also, for example, blood cells, pollen, oceanic wave formations, or
abstract concepts, then hacking and spoofing their identity becomes much more provocative. We already have many Users online pretending to be other things, or forced
by some exploit to mimic the appearance and value of other things on behalf of
strange plots. Darknets allow for peer-to-peer sharing between devices without openly
revealing their IP addresses and by actively obscuring addresses through the anonymizing rerouting of traffic. For the design brief of the Address layer, what is “dark”
is any material that is connected to the rest of the world based on mischievous or
accidental departure from its natural location or quality. As the saying can go, online
no one knows that you are (not) a hurricane, a bee, an implanted organ, a crab nebula, a legal procedure for the packing of fish in the Solomon Islands, or a can of Del
Monte corn, if you say that you are. By comparison, today’s DoS (denial of service)
attacks on devices operating at the scale of the Internet of Things seem pedestrian. But
DoS attacks on living tissue or on active concepts (!) suggests difficult new domains of
cyberbiowarfare, either beyond the immediate scope of NSA/PLA privilege or as their
next assignment. Both state and poststate security apparatuses already familiar with
ruse surveillance and camouflage are drawn deeper into the viscous mire of networked
performance.
So if deep address evolves in such directions, its geopolitical effect may be driven
more by these accidents, doublings, and reversals than by immaculate chambers of
unventilated order. Should the day come when we are flying over cities spaying aerosolized smart motes with effectors, then not only will “Street View” come to mean
a trillion possible perspectives at once, but also that the fertile soup germinating in
every sidewalk crack will overflow the business models of today’s enterprises, to say
the least.46 When our lives are linked by the deeply addressable traces, shed like dead
skin cells, then the biographical and cognitive contiguity of the individual User will

216

Address Layer

rupture into a thick cloud of shadows (more on this in the User chapter). Moreover,
given that today at least 75 percent of all e-mail sent is spam, and that if you were to
add together spambots, search engine spiders, scrappers, and so forth, well over half
all Internet traffic is initiated by nonhumans, then for the deep address, how difficult
a problem will object-to-object spam be? If the current net is any indicator, even the
everyday Internet of Things may involve equipment, furniture, driverless cars, and
sensor arrays ruthlessly direct-response marketing to one another.47 But perhaps it is
not spam, and the presentation and exchange of alluring information is exactly what
happens already in the coordination of sympathetic and symbiotic relationships in
nature, say, between a bee and a bright flower or a peacock displaying for a peahen.
One would have to stretch the metaphor well beyond snapping point to suggest that a
field in spring bloom is “spamming” insects to come and fly their pollination routes,
but to observe a slice of any complex ecology, at any scale, is to see that things are
already communicating with one another, and with incredible intensity and intricacy.
Some deep address scenarios would augment these lines of communication with formal addresses, sensors, and effectors, a prospect that leads in directions that are disruptive, destructive, creative, and outlandish. Would the interweaving of the existing
matrices of communication between things with the secondary blanket of addresses
introduce, in the intermingling of their tempos, their resiliencies and fragilities, their
defenses, immunities, and fitness selection dynamics, some sort of second-order synthetic evolution at least in some local sites? Distortions emerge that are unknowable in
advance, and with them the universality of the Address layer makes it always suspect
to idiosyncratic purposes and outcomes. If its network topology is apparently flat and
affected by endothermic perturbations from any point, then it is not just a map; it is
a medium, an ecology even, and it can and will evolve. Gray goo scenarios of out-ofcontrol molecular manufacturing and discharging entropic sludge in its wake are now
best understood less as a real existential risk than as a parable for mindless industrial
rapaciousness. Similarly, perhaps federations of the Addressed, across scales, become
catalysts of a countercomposition of the world, generating unthinkable new ground
and air, and so instead of an Anthropocenic future in which fewer and fewer conglomerates own, license, or otherwise capitalize more and more things, perhaps the evolution of the infrastructure results in an inversion of the ratio, whereby something on
the order of 340 undecillian haecceities (in IPv6 address space) come to recompose and
govern a vastly smaller number of assemblages. But there is a countervailing scenario
(perhaps equally parabolical) in which the unfathomable legion of haecceities lurches
not toward entropy but toward a new and more heterogeneous and complex jungle,
one that is perhaps mostly unrecognizable and incommunicable for us.48
The integrity of these sorts of accidents emerges not against the grain of the Address
layer’s ambition of universalization and totality but along with its emergence, and
this may be how the dehierarchicalization of natural denotation can be approached.

Address Layer

217

Any haecceity can enter into incongruous economies with unlike addressing territories
without final resolution or conflict. Any haecceity can also appear to any addressing
territory as what it actually is, or instead as what a strategic exploit (perhaps launched
by another object) would have other Users believe that it is, and thus baking principles
of simulation and deception into the genetic code of the system. Instead of freezing
every addressable instance in place, gathering them into a maniacal, brittle central
geography, the universality of deep address as a platform may unleash allochthonous,
spooky ecologies that bend and disfigure any master program of homeostatic order.
Lastly, the radical ubiquity of addressing may allow the entire project of planetary-scale
computation to survive the eventual transition out of the Anthropocene in ways that
our lumbering, hungry Internet will not. If so, deep address may outlive The Stack, and
it may even be part of whatever post-Anthropocenic platform infrastructures of energy
and information come next.

Interface Layer

This whole question of the cinematic author is certainly about ensuring the distribution of films,
since creative work solicits a whole other temporality, but it is also about keeping open the possibility of creating films that do not yet exist. Maybe cinema is not capitalist enough. There are
circuits of money with very different durations: short-term, mid-term and long-term cinematic
investment should be recognized and encouraged. In science, capitalism does now and then
rediscover the interest in doing fundamental research.
—Gilles Deleuze, from “The Brain Is the Screen”1
I wouldn’t have seen it if I hadn’t believed it.
—Marshall McLuhan2

No system as complex as The Stack could actually work without some way to simplify
its functions and render them legible for the end Users who make it all go on a second-by-second and year-by-year basis.3 Users can use and be used by The Stack only to
the extent that they are provided the Interfaces that make the Earth, Cloud, City, and
Address layers available and sensible for them. Without that Interface translation layer,
User actions can’t affect those infrastructures or be affected by them in any regular
and scalable fashion. While interfaces fix and limit possibilities, they simplify them in
different ways for different Users. How interfaces mediate between people, things, and
the technical layers lower in The Stack also depends on how a User perceives the natural world and is already able to make some sense of it. For example, if those Users are
machines or other inanimate objects, then the interfaces through which they recognize The Stack may be specialized sensors, codes, switches, or chemical surfaces. If the
User is a more phenomenologically intuitive subject, such as a human, then the exact
semantics of interfaces (perhaps icons, symbols, indexes, and diagrams) work not
only to synthesize some affordances of The Stack, but also to narrativize the meaning of possible actions that someone might take. In this weave of signification and
significance, and in the potential to order the world through intense narrative diagrams (geographical, theological, ideological), the human-Stack interface also locates

220

Interface Layer

everyday interactions within larger contests over what should count as the form and
content of political geography by connecting between local and global scales. To do
this, graphical user interfaces (GUI) in particular offer a kind of diagrammatic map
of what they interface between and what they interface toward, be that a machine or
an imagined territory. But unlike drawn maps, GUI not only describe the spaces they
refer to; they also allow a User to directly act on them in a way that is (one hopes)
both cognitively and semantically consistent with its demarcations.4 It can provide
this in different ways for different translations, each drawing out a slightly different
world for a User. Ultimately it is the arbitrary precision of interfacial diagrams of specific interactions that allows them to delimit in advance what the User can and cannot do with The Stack as a whole. Beyond just the framing of possible actions, the
active responsiveness of the interfacial diagram allows its unique mapping of reality
to seem not only valid but also functionally real to the User. Through The Stack, interfaces are tools for remapping what they map, and as interfacial drawings multiply,
their alternate geographies overlap and juxtapose. This accumulation of incommensurable recursive projections back into direct perceptual reality (however inaccurate,
false, stupefying, and illegible they may be) is the first generative accident of the Interface layer.
51. What Interfaces Are
The Interface layer consists of any technical-informational machine, compressed into
graphical or objective formats, that links or delinks Users and the Addressed entities
up and down columns within the Stack. Its role is to telescope, compress, and expand
layers of The Stack, routing User actions both up and down as they go.5 We need to
think of interfaces not only in terms of the GUI (as “buttons with words on them”)
but as a more generic structuring of links and boundaries within a given form or
field.6 An interface is any point of contact between two complex systems that governs the
conditions of exchange between those systems.7 Levers, steering wheels, doorways, mobile
Apps, fences, office layout schemes, international borders, telecommunications infrastructure: these are all interfaces. The conditioning of exchange that any interface provides could be variously promiscuous or prophylactic, physical or virtual, accelerating
or decelerating, signifying or asignifying, symmetrical or asymmetrical, territorializing
or deterritorializing.8 The interface could be a line that links two things together into
one, or a line that cleaves them apart. Buttons and levers are interfaces to machines
and to what machines do. Familiar architectural interfaces organize interior and exterior zones, and borders between countries are interfaces between sovereign polities.
Once an image can be used to control what it represents, it too becomes technology:
diagram plus computation equals interface. As a computationally intensive interface, the
image is not only a picture of the network; it is also an instrument through which

Interface Layer

221

a user of this image-interface can effect change back on that network. Computation
turns the image into a technology, just as it then turns technology more generally
into fields of actionable images—in this case, maps that also reprogram territories.
In other words, for the GUI specifically, interfaces are diagrams of possible actions, a
menu of simulations that when activated (clicked, touched, pinched, waved at, chosen from a delimited array of options) executes some information loop resulting (it
is assumed) in an outcome approximating what was on the menu. The veracity of
that loop between interface and event depends on both a technical correspondence
between one part of a machine and another (i.e., a button on a keyboard linked to
a peripheral device across the room) as well as a semiotic correspondence between
a visual simulation and a relevant outcome (i.e., between an icon on the screen that
resembles X and the X-like event that it initiates in the world). We could have one
loop working without the other, and often do in fact, but our expansive interfacial
modernity depends on a universally usable and effectively compelling alignment
between these two correspondences. For interfaces to be systematic, clicks must work
and do what they promise.
For this, an interface necessarily limits the full range of possible interactions in a
specific and arbitrary way. Any interface, because it is a specific summary, must eliminate or make invisible a whole range of other equally valid possible interactions. This
is not in itself a negative aspect of interfaciality. Only because they reduce and simplify complex systems can they make it possible for people to use those systems at
a systematic scale and realize platform value from them. Without coercing us, the
interface cannot properly interface anything to us. This essential persuasive and rhetorical work of interfaces can obviously have ambiguous and negative consequences
(one augmented reality interface for a video game might “suggest” to the User which
unworthy strangers in a crowd to kill, another might give deliberately misleading
nutritional information about food, and another uses everyday keystrokes to execute
remote, unadjudicated violence). But the subtraction of possible interactions to a
manageable set leaves behind clearer channels of systemic legibility. With the Interface, the User sees what she can do with The Stack. At the same time, the range of
possible interfacial circuits into The Stack may not be identical for every User even for
the same machine, and so for the Interface layer, the governance is also the modulation and enforcement of the differential possibilities available through a specific
interface and for a specific User. Interfaces slice, cleave, and individuate. Each is open
for some and closed to others.
For software polities derived from intermodal networks, the provision of contact
itself is condensed into these buttons and icons, menus and dashboards, familiar pathways and arresting surfaces. These are nodes along lines of urban flow: terminals, spectacles, ports, and stations. Interfaces link and partition society itself, as belief systems,
ballots, and borders. Such points of contact, everywhere and nowhere at once, are not

222

Interface Layer

just our interfaces to the world, but also the world’s channels to us. What is open for
me may be closed to you, and so our vectors are made divergent. As we ourselves are
hurtled through logistical space, the world discloses itself to us as interfaces: activated
and unactivated interfaces, fast and slow interfaces, synchronous and asynchronous
interfaces, graphical and tangible interfaces. As discussed regarding the City layer, what
Deleuze called “control” is based on the computational intensity of interfaces and governs through its differentiation of the capacities of Users to do and make things in
accordance with whatever interfaces they can access (and that can act on their behalf).
Some Users are sent drifting through the City, bouncing across zoning boundaries, given
provisional subjectivity by interfaces that allow for their mutual communication, governed less by what captures them in place than by what programs their aimlessness and
what alegally inserts them into demand chains without names. Others are sent very
intentionally into the urban storm, bound by formal zones with explicit legal projects.
Both assemble tactical habitats and tradable assets, and are in turn absorbed by them
in accordance with how their individuated profiles as Interface Users can be monetized
by sacred and secular Cloud capitalizations.
52. Interfaces at Hand: From Object to Sign to Object
About our hands, those prehensile interfaces with which we embody cognition and
manipulation, Michel Serres writes that they are never finished. Unlike animal limbs
and their ecological niches, the hand is “despecialized” and adapted not to one specific
task like the crab’s claw but open to the limit of the world. The world is the place where
hands are usable.9 Evolutionary biologists may differ, but the hands of Serres’s parable
are, unlike, say, the fur of a cheetah, which camouflages her only in the savanna niche,
adaptable to any number of unforeseen environmental and technical challenges. As
adaptations, hands are general-purpose interfaces; they are machines that allow for the
fabrication of all manner of subsequent machines (clothing, shelter, tools, weapons),
which in turn allowed us to accelerate evolutionary advantages by transforming our
environment faster that it would be possible to evolve our bodies (capturing and wearing the fur of another animal is far more expedient than waiting to grow fur after having migrated north, for example). This story of prehensile environmental embodiment,
a self-animating circuit of habit and habitat, also speaks to the City’s ambient informational fields through which we learn to mediate spaces both near and far. Such spheres
of influence need to be learned, and while it takes time to master remote controls, let
alone the control of remoteness, we are fast learners. There are monkeys that, as part of
a project by Michel Nicolelis, have learned to control a robotic arm and hand through
interfacial electronics connected to the brain.10 The primate’s dispositional impulses
become informational pulses that, properly mediated, effect a remote grasping prosthesis to do its bidding. Just as we learned QWERTY in order to type by internalizing the

Interface Layer

223

feedback of expression and arbitrary inscription machines, we also now learn to operate the interfaciality of other habitats and ambient surfaces. As we negotiate the interfacial density of the urban fabric, our own primate bodies are infused and intersected
by its rhythmic extensions, controlling its machinery at a distance and triangulated as
subject-Users by that machinery in the course of our movements. Cloud infrastructures
seep and rupture through the orifices of the city into the open view of people and their
mobile screens, and around them we proprioceptively map our displacements in real
and imagined geographies.11
With Serres’s lesson in mind, I am looking at photos that I happened to take of
the moment when my son Lucien, then two years old, became interested in a certain
remote control that turned on and off an overhead light and a fan in our home office.
That night he spent at least an hour clicking them both, light and dark, spinning and
not spinning, in various combinations. He was lost in a fundamental discovery about
his new world: that some things are not like other things and possess an inscrutable
power to affect other things at a distance in predictable and repeatable patterns and
according to some invisible force controlled by buttons. He had discovered a basic
principle of modern interfaciality, and for him this was very big news. Like many other
kids, he entered a phase of button-pushing mania, investigating which objects, surfaces, and icons possess this capacity, serving which effect, and which did not. He
may also have deduced, in his own way, that this interfaciality is not reducible to the
physical qualities of any object. A plastic button by itself, disconnected from any relay
or absent that invisible force of effect, has no interfacial power. Isolated, it is all but useless, just a button. Only when it is embedded in some system of input and output, usually involving waves or wires, he soon learns, does the thing become interfacial. Then
it takes on its capacities of sorting, transference, and vicarious causality. But of course,
that particular discovery is limited to interfaces with local and observable cybernetic
circuits. Remote interfaces, linking Users across time zones perhaps, are more difficult
to keep straight. More broadly, any effective tool has some interfacial capacities in that
it transforms, encodes, or transmits some worldly dynamic in a specific way. A rock is
an interface if you use it in the right way. We could say, at the risk of teleology, that the
mastery of a tool, already a kind of embodied internalization of its own effects, entails a
specific intelligence regarding the mutual interfaciality of objects in the world. That is,
any reflexive knowledge of effects and environments must also include an understanding of the intrinsic and extrinsic interfacialities of available objects.12
But what about GUIs and their links, both simulated and mechanical? For them
Charles Sanders Peirce’s full range of “signs” (icon, index, symbol, diagram) is put
to use in order to represent what interfaces do and the programs they present to us.
Instead of manipulating objects as tools, we have learned to manipulate signs that
have the same technical effects of tools. A general conversion is at work in this transference of interfacial knowledge from things to signs for things, from objects to icons.

224

Interface Layer

A fantastic transubstantiation takes place for which visual signs and images no longer
simply represent other things in the world, but become themselves tactile technologies that, when activated, cause a real event to occur correspondent with the semantic
content of that sign/image. A picture of a bomb is merely a representation, whereas a
button with a picture of a bomb on it that causes remote explosions is weaponized skeuomorphism. Put in more technical terms, the GUI is a visualization of a machinic network and of the outcomes that it claims to mediate; the formation of its interfaciality
is an arc of translation from a set of possibilities into a visual instrument. Between the
machine and what it can do and the representations of that potential are translations,
and however arbitrary or integral each may be, they are necessary for our comprehension of any network we might encounter.
This is particularly true for computational machines, which can, according to
software instructions, perform any calculable task we might assign to them. In the
past, any one of those functions may have been performed by a single-purpose analog machine that perhaps communicated its unique functions directly by its form.
Wrenches look like wrenching. Computational machines may rely on the rhetorics
of the interface to do the same, or as a design strategy, the posture of the computational object and its function can evolve semiautonomously. Through that expression
of function by GUI layers, the machine network can appear to be and do almost anything, and because of this (not in spite of it), the interface is essential to the machine
itself. In the play of a function communicating itself, honestly or by dissimulation,
the real and relative transparency or opacity of an interface’s distant effects are themselves disclosed, hidden, or masked. As the interface conceals and narrates, its concealments and narrations are themselves concealed and narrated. At one extreme, placebo
interfaces let Users point and click all they want and yet have no real effect on any
outcome other than apophenic satisfaction. Some Users manage persuasive interfaces,
which deliberately train the self in response to positive and negative feedback stimulus, promising more control over life by reassigning that control to automated metrics.
These micro-rhetorics of the interface are core to their social effects. Some call this
“making computers invisible,” others call it “interaction dissolving into behavior,”
and still others “society without organs.” Not so unlike my son, we are all probing
our interfacial condition, trying to figure out the ultimate technical, ethical, political,
and aesthetic possibilities of a world full of images of things that do (or do not do) the
things they visual signify.
In the awkward, incomplete (and incompletable) semiotics of interface representability, where cause and effect is reduced to a bounded set of idiomatic and idiotic
pictograms, culture becomes interfacial and vice versa. Even a maturing metaphysics
of data visualization serving the ubiquity of time-based diagrams of events and patterns (and prototyping perhaps what future GUI will look like) does not provide a
short-cut out of ambiguity, but it does raise the stakes.13 In that they previsualize their

Interface Layer

225

effects in advance for us, these sorts of interface machines must be located within
a historical shift in technologies of the image itself.14 Taking the long view, we see
that humans’ externalized expression of visual ideas dates at least to the primordial
architectures of the cave wall, and then much later, it passed through a relatively
short painting-photographic-cinematic phase (lasting a few centuries, give or take) for
which individual images and image sequences were produced, distributed, and appreciated as rare artifactual events. Now and for the foreseeable future, images are a specific genre of machines. How so? Like the images on paper money that appear as they
do in order to support the performance of specific counterfeit-prevention technologies designed into the patterns, some images have a discrete technical capacity that
is inextricable from their physical form. Consider how everyday data visualization
turns the diagrammatic image into a scientific, managerial, and military instrument,
or how GUIs turn icons into active, goal-directed tools mediating between human
folk psychology of action and algorithms linked to screens in the User’s environment.
Additionally GUIs don’t only mirror preexisting User intentions; as whole interfacial regimes (such as Windows or iOS or Bloomberg Terminal, etc.), they also train
thought toward certain ways of interpreting that environment through the repetition
of represented interactions. As those representations become more closely glued to
the direct perception of environments (as for augmented reality, for example), their
capacity to engender committed interpretations for Users will prove irresistible to
various fundamentalisms (see below). The machinic image is qualified by many little
sinkholes between the symbolic, the imaginary, and the real, and at a global scale of
billions of Users, the interfacial image is also partially a function of sheer machinic
quantity. With the comparatively instantaneous adoption of mobile devices (a Turing complete processor camera homing tether telephonic voice relay), we have
seen an explosion in the absolute volume of mechanical images of and in the world,
dwarfing the total sum produced before the mobile phone appeared in our hands.
Unlike images of the painting-photographic-cinematic era, these images do not pass
into an archive only after their practical life is passed; rather, through various Apps,
images are produced through the medium of the archival database itself, socialized
through the archive, and assigned searchable metadata through the archive. As a
consequence, the general image apparatus is slowly accumulating a comprehensive
simulation of visual experience that will be of enormous value to future artificial
intelligences interested in simulating its Anthropocenic origins. This may even be its
most durable purpose and its true responsibility. Even today, it’s not difficult to see
the whole Android user population (for example) as comprising individual nodes in
a vast, massively distributed supercomputing sensing, seeing, tracking, and sorting
platform. At the same time, visual trends like the New Aesthetic suggest the potential of an art (if that is still the right word) that is made not only by artificial vision
machines generating their own autonomous aesthetic, but in time an art for such

226

Interface Layer

intelligences that can appreciate them uniquely and perhaps develop their own taste
genres of M2M (machine-to-machine) connoisseurship.15 It is also worth noting that
many current applications of the machinic image (e.g., on currency, or to X-ray great
works of art to verify their originality, or facial recognition to verify the identity of
User) are used to authenticate the originality of either the image itself or what it represents. With Walter Benjamin in mind, we see that the image in the age of mechanical
reproduction is being pushed toward the assignment of verifying the original and its
aura as well.
However, even as GUIs become more normative and essential to the instrumentalization of global culture, we also see at the same time that physical objects are increasingly imbued with the interfacial intelligences of computational media (storage,
calculation, and transmission). This suggests a reversal of the earlier shift from natural
interfacial objects to virtual interfacial signs, and now back again to computationally
intensive interfacial objects. The MIT Media Lab Tangible Media Group, led by Hiroshi
Ishii, works on tangible user interfaces (TUI) and a future of radical atoms based on
microscopic computing machines dissolved into physical matter, while the MIT Center for Bits and Atoms led by Neil Gershenfeld develops self-assembling microrobotics
and a program of “conformal computing” in which artificial and natural information layers might interoperate directly. Computation is cast again as a generic solvent
within and between everyday things. In living rooms, Microsoft’s Kinect gestural-based
gaming interface dispenses with touch altogether and relies instead on Users’ natural
maneuvers and proprioceptive skills to manipulate both physical things and their digital shadows (a general-purpose theremin).16 These expansions of interfaciality through
objects return it from the semiotic to the corporeal, and in doing so draw potentially
even wider worlds into their computational domains than GUI can. The GUI largely
reduced the hand to a fingertip, one that points and selects among a bounded set
of options, and so simulated tactile craft as a sequence of discrete menu items, each
executing chosen software subroutines in programmed sequences. But with gesturaltangible-haptic interfaces, we can imagine the possibility of a fully mature interface
regime that dispenses almost entirely with both the alphanumeric machine of the keyboard and the semiotic machine of clickable icon. In contrast, some things might be
so thoroughly imbued by that computational solvent that they will contain their own
direct interfaciality with the world, not as objective metaphors but as real objects. To
interact with an everyday object may involve haunted causality at a distance. To provide interfacial mediation between the mobile primates—that’s us—and the environmentally embedded digital information in which we are situated, such a regime would
rely instead on the wisdom of spatial-object navigation accumulated over millennia:
waving, poking, dancing, stacking, peeling, squishing, sorting, throwing. Any of these
interactions with computational matter could link Users down the layers of The Stack
and back up again.

Interface Layer

227

We then extend the traced path for modern interfaculty from objects as primordial
interfaces, shifting then to graphical signs as modern interfaces, and again back to
objects, now imbued with the computational intelligence to interpret our gestures. In
considering an emergent genre of object interfaciality, blending natural and artificial
information into composite manipulative substances and habitats, one question to
raise, after Serres’s parable, is, “What happens to the hand and its universal flexibility
to manipulate the world?”17 For the GUI, the hand is trained to sift through menus,
windows, and sliders, playing a software application like a musical instrument, but in
doing so, its immediate range of adaptive expression is focused on the pushing and
pulling of signs and simulations. Those software routines initiated may be highly varied, but when computational objects and habitats respond to a wide range of gestures
and manipulations, we can imagine that they may allow the hand a much wider range
of expression, and in this, there are potentially novel coadaptations of the hand and
the programmable object interface, of the grasp and the grasped.18 At the same time,
as the world meets it more than halfway, the uniqueness of the hand to exceed the
accommodation of one niche is made that much less unique, as the niche is itself programmed to perform specific reactions to whatever the hand commands (or to resist
that command and frustrate its intention). Heideggerians and Latourians spoke of the
“thing” as a kind of gathering of the world into itself, but when the physical object
is programmable in this way and responsive to gestures, or even able to make such
gestures on its own affecting other objects in its orbit, then the interfacial thing seems
to “unfold” its influences out into the world. This kind of “thing,” and perhaps any
interface, is at least in this respect, is an inverse of a gathering; it aggressively unfurls its
relations in a tangle of effect and relay.19
How does that interfacial arc, from natural object to graphical sign to computational object, scale up for the collective interfacial matrices of the City layer, or the
Cloud layer, and of millions of people and billions of things at once? The allegory of
the city as a big computer is one that appears historically along with the computer
itself,20 but it’s an altogether different design challenge to account for an urban-scale
agglomeration of computational object-instruments, ranging in size from a few molecules,21 to a few centimeters, up to the scales of furniture, a dump truck, and city
block, all interacting among one another. Instead of (or in addition to) spatial projections through the graphical interface, this open condition for urban interfaciality
is closer to an expanded landscape architecture composed by active arrangements of
such objects. The design and governance challenge is then not to program this jungle
platform in advance according to some set master plan, but to formulate parameters
through which multiple subsystems can leverage one another.22 The emergence of its
eventual governance would be determined less by fixed formal interventions than by
a procedural choreography and the accommodation of unpredictable collectives of
these unfurling interfacial objects. The interlacing of computation and urbanism isn’t

228

Interface Layer

the direct superimposition of an artificial computational network on top of a given
cement-and-steel scenario, but the activation or suppression of programs already present. For example, industrial technologies did not introduce electromagnetic fields in
the urban landscape, but activated what was always there, and similarly, the design
challenge of this urban-scale interfaciality is also to provide some regularizing geography to territorial energies already at work (as discussed in the linking of physical and
virtual envelopes). That said, determining how sets of such computational hyperobjects might be embedded into the City layer remains a prerogative not just for interface design, even in this expanded sense, but can be initiated from any of the other
layers of The Stack as well.23 We assume that any single object, perhaps as the subject of multiple Address schemas at once, will be interpolated not only by one master
geography but many projects and projections at once. Critically, it is the incommensurability between these claims that is the real engine for Stack’s geopolitics of interfaciality, writ large and small.
53. The Interface as Layer
Interfaces are thresholds. They connect and disconnect in equal measure, structuring
flows by combining and segmenting it, enabling it or frustrating it,24 bridging unlike
forms over vast distances and subdividing that which would otherwise congeal on its
own.25 Any given interface may have one effect at one site, just as it has the opposite
effect at another. Its performance—who, what, and how it interfaces—may vary widely
depending on circumstances. At a global level of billions of interfaces working at once,
The Stack might deterritorialize (and apparently decentralize) modern institutional
inputs and outputs at the same time that it installs another even more regularized
network on the same landscape (effectively recentralizing it in its own image at the
Cloud layer). But while this superimposition of generic thresholds works to homogenize
the wider apparatus, it can also flatten hierarchies of access to that infrastructure, as
we’ve seen. It bears reinforcing at this point that this is an elemental principle of The
Stack as an organizing matrix, and to a degree of platforms in general; through rigid
regularization, dynamic self-directed flow can achieve scale, and as it does, those flows
congeal and centralize into global subplatforms (as we see among the key set of players at the Cloud layer discussed above). The dynamic is not unique to computational
platforms. It is as apparent in the urban systems that order physical flows according
to fixed geometries that host dynamic autonomous circulation, which in time produce new superscalar nodes often centralized around key threshold points. When grid
topologies circumscribe sites as individual cells within their larger matrix, they also
allow each to generate its heterogeneous program, separate from its horizontal neighbors and internally differentiated within its own vertical strata, as far up into the air as
needed. (The form that is horizontally differentiated as a discrete cell within an urban

Interface Layer

229

grid and vertically differentiated by multiple stacked programs is called a skyscraper.)26
Especially but not exclusively for GUIs, Stack interfacial systems are also grids and
sometimes work in a similar way as urban grids. The lines they draw, both linking and
segmenting, crisscross one another in regular patterns and circumscribe individual cells
within their own particular telescopic logics of the global and the local. As multiple
interfaces congeal or are deployed as strategically particular interfacial regimes, they
push toward naming everything that is visible to its scope (as discussed in the Address
layer chapter). In that this drawing is also a kind of machine, the GUI synthesizes cognition (and aspiration, affect, drama) into its syntax; it grids both the image machine
itself and the space in which the image machine can act. Interfaces can give local shape
to The Stack’s aspiration to nomos, prototyping political geography as a technology
of artificial distributed cognition, and through this, it constructs and configures the
diagram of possible action that Users can make on The Stack and that The Stack can
make on Users. An interfacial regime draws together flows and connections that may
be geographically dispersed, massively discontiguous, and yet intimately connected
by a particular causal interfacial chain, and then presents these to the User as a single
image in its own particular way, different than other such regimes. The interface takes
what is linked by distributed computational systems but impossible to directly perceive
because it is happening across the planet at once, and in turn gives it a portrait. In this
regard, interfacial regimes are also totality machines, both describing linkages and making projective claims over them. But as said unlike other geographic projections, the
interface is not only a visual representation of an aspirational totality; it is an image of
a totality that when acted upon actually effects it. By using these kinds of image-mapinstruments, the User herself collaborates in the real remaking of the world according
to that interfacial regime’s particular geographic vision and representations. The power
(and danger) of the Interface layer is this remaking of the world through instrumentalized images of totality; it is what gives any interfacial regime even a politico-theological
coherency and appeal.27
In the following sections, I examine the dynamics of the Interface layer of The Stack
by looking at three ways that interfacial regimes organize the actions of Users in their
own image. First, the visual organization of an aesthetics of logistics28 and global assemblage line draw total images of commodity production across vast distances. As nodes
within global interface networks, these images are themselves subject to exponential
arcs, such as Moore’s law, and when accelerated, they in turn accelerate the flows of all
those things that they interface. Second is the role of Apps to counterprogram immediate User habitats and recast them as localized forms of Cloud hardware. This also has
the effect of simultaneously augmenting and dissipating the technical specificity of
the hand as the privileged interface between body and environment. Third is how the
direct blending of a graphical interfacial overlay on a User’s direct perception poses
unique complications for design and interface geopolitics. We will look at the specific

230

Interface Layer

case of augmented reality interfaces and consider their ripeness for the revival and
innovation of fundamentalist and militarized forms of political theology.
54. Interfaces in The Stack 1: The Aesthetics of Logistics
Because interfacial grids within The Stack compose lines that both subdivide and
gather, even at the same time, and because these framings localize interactions within
a global platform, they can control the distribution of bits, objects, and affects according to those curves. Within this context, the effectiveness of the GUI is not limited to
simple relays but also depends on other physical interfaces in the landscape. A contemporary interfacial regime includes all manner of gates and switches, both large and
small, adding up to a vast distribution of circuits: anatomical sensations, screen-based
icons, chips and sensors, software protocols, buildings and roads, airport terminals,
warehouses and continental shipping ports, transoceanic supply chains, open and
closed production cycles, forensic analytics, geographically particular store shelves,
individuated instances of consumption, and so on. Any particular interfacial regime is
itself one among the many that compete to design The Stack, and while each provides
a particular (perhaps totalizing) logistical imaginary for the Interface layer, it in no way
exhausts its design horizon.
Interfacial regimes focus all mediation onto and into key switch points, but like any
other media, they are not only conduits of information; they also produce information by translating and relaying it from there to here. Interfaces work as machines,
and machines work as interfaces, and so in the wider interfacial landscape, many specific technologies are not isolated mechanisms put to work for isolated goals; they
are also technologies for the production of other technologies. A car is produced by
assembly line robots, which are produced by other machines, which are produced by
other machines, all operating in relations of mutual production (it is technology turtles
all the way down). In this contemporary logistics, the procedural chains of productive and consumptive succession pass from one machine to another and one interface
point to another. The interfaciality of each level is of course designed toward particular ends, even if the entire chain is not really knowable or viewable as one big whole
from any one point. For The Stack, increasingly intense computational intelligence is
designed into specific nodes in this chain, and sometimes without knowledge or control of other interfaces that may directly or indirectly link to it. Despite this, or perhaps
because of it, we should then define interface design not only as the specification of one
given node (such as the GUI for an App) but also as the design of the succession of relays
through an intended pathway of connections. It is a programming of multiple interfaces in spatial and temporal sequence, potentially spanning ideation and production
to distribution to consumption to recycling and recapture. With this expanded brief,
interface design (combining tool, icon, space, service, interaction, organization, and so

Interface Layer

231

on) encompasses the design of objects and surfaces and the systems that enable other
Users to put their own programs in motion, as well as the programming of the processes whereby all these things may assemble or disassemble according to plan. By this
perspective, the potential interfaciality of any single node (virtual or physical) could
be thought of as equal to the cumulative interfaciality of all the processes that it can
put in motion toward some resulting assemblage, however permanent or temporary.
This is first-order interface design: the design of chains of interfacial effect by means of
physical and virtual relay networks (and it clearly has much in common with platform
design but focuses on designing the exact mediations as its essential problematic).29
Today, at the withering end of post-Fordism and tilting perhaps toward a material
economy based on desktop fabrication and real-time customization, we observe logistics shifting from the spatially contiguous assembly line to the radically discontiguous
assemblage line linked internally through a specific interfacial chain.30 Contemporary
logistics disembeds production of things from particular sites and scatters it according
to the synchronization and global variance in labor price and resource access, and it
is this delinking that makes the arrival to us of material goods (and the process of the
world of production in general) more opaque, even occult. How things come to be is
removed further from the daily experience of direct cause and effect. The cyclical routes
of the artificial ecologies of logistics are often proprietary and subterranean, and it is
the visual incomprehensibility of the origins and outcomes of the interfacial chains in
which Users are embedded (you, me, it) that instigates a second-order interface design,
namely, information visualization, or the diagrammatic summation and articulation
of those interfacial chains so that their form might be grasped. As hinted, GUIs also
perform a kind of information visualization on their own. Beyond simple instrumentation, in their rhetorical display of relay networks connected to any one surface, we find
the GUI’s pedagogical narrativization of discontiguous processes redrawn as a single
actionable diagram, perhaps its most essential social function. Global logistics’ material
economy of assemblage is mediated to human actors, along its many chains, through
these reductive interfacial summary diagrams of planetary-scale computational networks. It has to be seen also as a kind of rhetorical and stylistic system suggesting, if
not promising, closure.31 As real logistical channels link the unlikely arcs of things
from here to there and from there to here, they then also enroll the User not only into
an aesthetic of logistics but also logistics itself as an aesthetic ideal.32 However, in this
drawing together of otherwise incomprehensible cause and effect, the tracing of idealized configurations of flow becomes self-validating, and when these interfacial network
visualizations evolve from diagrams into active instruments of action to enforce those
configurations, they take on a life of their own.
The orthodox post-Fordist plot for “the network society” recounts a storied evolution from fixed, contiguous institutional interfaces into decentralized serial nodes and
couplings. Old centers give way to new networks. But logistical modernity is defined as

232

Interface Layer

much by the concentration around meganodes and global platforms and protocols as
it is by decentralization and dispersion (e.g., Google, the shipping container, the TCP/
IP protocol, US dollars). For The Stack, the performance of governance both centralizes
and decentralizes interfacial regimes, one informing the other, and in this, the spinal
contours of a global social morphology unfold along with them, their topological convulsions inextricable from the computational infrastructures with which they evolve
and through which they are expressed. For this, we observe that there is something
like a Moore’s law of exponential computing speed not only for processors but also for
the interfaces and the landscapes of gateways that they power; there is an arc of exponentially accelerating computational capacity for both individual interfaces and their
composite networks. Instead of tracking the number of transistors on a given chip, this
exponential arc of interfacial acceleration might measure the total aggregate switches
within a landscape of interfaces through which relays snake from site to site, or perhaps
the number of FLOPS (floating-point operations) that landscape as a whole is capable
of providing per second or per day.33 This would recognize the network effects of the
intensification of edges as well as nodes. It might (with sufficient research) specify
something like the maximal carrying capacity of the computational substrate of the
global economy in any given moment: the total possible interfacial throughput of all
interconnected nodes and points and a weighing of the relays with which they accelerate in logarithmic correspondence.
Any increase in the computational capacity of any given interface, as both conduit
and producer of information, allows that interface to concentrate and give structure to
greater quantities and more complex qualities of informational-logistical flow. In turn,
as computational power and networked software become faster and cheaper, each node
is newly empowered as a medium of governance over what those flows represent, and
so the intensification of capacity also shines political attention onto them. This “law”
of interfacial acceleration makes any given node able to handle increasingly complex
programs, which, in accumulation at the level of a whole interfacial regime, also amplifies the complexity of articulation through which that governance can act. This makes
any question as to how to design an interfacial regime that much more fraught and
important, and especially so when its nodes are programmed and articulated through
the Cloud layer (such as Android and iOS nodes in motion, sucking up information as
they are dragged around the world by Users) as this can also induce overflow of the
jurisdictional bounds of any single designer’s own control or her client’s. Put more
succinctly, the acceleration of a network of interfacial nodes, both screen based and
physically embedded, gives that network greater capacity, and for this, social systems
place greater demands on it, capitalizing further acceleration, and shifting interest and
attention onto them as they displace other infrastructures for which they may have
played only a supporting role in the recent past. A tendency toward generalized mobility of goods, people, and information, as described throughout recent decades of social

Interface Layer

233

theory, should be seen as both a driver and effect of this technical acceleration in the
computational power and communicative flexibility of the interface regimes that contest with one another to congeal the social domains of Users.34 It is an autocatalytic
process. The greater the mobility is within the network, the greater the need for more
sophistication in its interfaces, and the greater the availability of cheap, powerful, intelligent computation, the greater the enabling of flexible mobilization. Phenomenon
feeds on epiphenomenon feeds on emergent capacity, and back again. For The Stack,
this makes the production and figuration of these interfaces a critical site of empowered authority and its social imaginary. As discussed regarding the City layer, forms
of power that were once inscribed by the fixed and partitioned citadel are shifted to
ambient gateways for bodies in motion, now gathered into open corrals with invisible
fences. This distribution provides the raw material and competitive channels for new
forms of concentration and capture, not in citadels but platforms.
One of the most complex social effects of that generalized acceleration and centripetal consolidation is a sense of systemic incoherency for the end User and a corresponding need for interfaces to then renarrate whatever they connect. From the perspective
of the User, as the intensification of computational power of each interfacial node and
of the aggregate networks that link them gathers momentum along its accelerating axis
and provides for more intense logistical linkages across even more nonlinear routes,
then the temporal integrity and cognitive coherency of the worlds mediated by them
are correspondingly dissolved in equal measure. Unlike a capitol building, corporate
headquarters, or medieval prison where the corporeality of power was embedded into
the site-specific dramatic choreography of architectural form and program, the architecture of The Stack delocalizes User experience of interactive cause-and-effect and its
chains of interfacial transference. They may appear invisible, ungraspable, or insubstantial, despite (or because of) the friction and fragmentation that they carry up and
down its layers. This well-known tendency of modernities to melt what is solid and
disembed institutions is turned once more back on the forms that those earlier modernities had established. So, as a therapeutic response, Interfaces are asked to soothe the
stress that they have caused by presenting their remedy images of orderly resolution as
data visualizations, as GUI, as mind maps, as tools and trackers. Some of these are real
medicine, some are placebo, some are dissimulation, but all are territorial claims on the
geographies and geometries of The Stack by competitive interfacial regimes. Because
the increase in computational intensity of each node in an opaque global network
and of the network’s circulatory capacity as a whole helps to produce the radically
diminished contiguity of the interfacial landscape, and less transparency of far-flung
assemblage lines, a tremendous demand is then placed back on its own images, especially interfacial images, which can represent the totality of these nodes into coherent wholes. Instead of appeasing the desire for a “binding collective representation,”35
nonlinear connections of the Interface layer seemingly intensify and radicalize it. The

234

Interface Layer

User demands visual resolution with descriptions, diagnoses, and coherent projections
of how important interfaces are dispersed and their impact on our lives. This is the
essential comfort of information visualization, especially dashboards, because instead
of being elusive and rare, data arrive in bewildering excess. This complicates its assignment to clarify things for us, as any query of the world results in so much raw information coming back to the User in response that another question must be asked of the
first answer in the form of a reductive visualization, and inside the bounding frame of
that diagram, pattern recognition begins to take over for interpretation.
This drawing of coherent wholes gathers multiple events and effects into a conceptual whole as if they were a single thing, and in the interfacial landscape, they in
fact are one and many at the same time (just as an automobile comprises hundreds of
smaller machines, not to mention legal, political, and cultural attributes and determinants, but these are understood in the singular, a car, and the plural at the same time).
This kind of putting together is different from an assemblage, which would refer the
real physical intermingling of material into a new composite. This conceptual gathering refers instead to how a massively discontiguous assemblage line, bound together
by exceedingly complex interfacial relays linking continents, must be understood and
represented as if it were a single pattern or machine.36 For The Stack, such apparently
comprehensive interfacial images of assemblage lines that themselves comprise interfacial relays, are, for the User, a necessary tool to manage otherwise illegibly complex
chains of interaction. It draws the discontiguous assemblage line into that resolved
diagram, but to do so, it must, like all diagrams, necessarily reduce and conceal the
complexity of the processes it represents (and as indicated above, that reduction is
also necessary to its ability to function as a broadly useful social tool). Further, as
interfaces are reductive in how they compress information—in their foregrounding
of certain things and not others—they are also inevitably “ideological.”37 Their reduction toward resolution is doctrinal. Ultimately the provision of an affectively compelling and instrumentally effective image of a composite interface chain becomes a
strategic expertise, as information designers carve out a niche to provide convincing
images of organization, tempo, and narrative.38 For Users, they compose cognitive
maps of multiple layers of exchange drawn at once, gathered into provisional total
images (for which pattern recognition and intentional, motivated interpretation can
start to merge.)39 Moreover, such image interfaces are not only maps of flows as they
exist according to whatever logic of reduction they invoke; they are also tools that
reproject and extend their conceptual gathering of relations back out onto the world.
Once more, unlike static diagrams, such interfaces can directly affect what they represent; as the chain of signification runs both from the event up through a chain of
representation to the image represents it, it also runs back down to the event, and so
the User-manipulated image of the thing becomes the medium through which the
thing can also be manipulated. In this recursion, the semiotic and instrumental loop

Interface Layer

235

is closed, and so these images of assemblage that are also machines to make those
assemblages are a third-order interface design. Within the broader history of images,
these diagrammatic tools are innovative in that they not only provide a convincing
and concise minimal diagram of far-flung processes; they actually do what they represent (see the above reference to “weaponized skeuomorphism”). Conversely within
the history of interfaces, which would include fences, levers, latches, knobs, switches,
handles, buttons, and plugs, these interfaces rely on visual representations of the
effects on the menu.
For this reason, the ideological reductiveness of the interfacial image is more than
a conceptual problem; it is also how systems enforce themselves, one against another.
An image of totality, which when acted on configures cause and effect in the literal
terms of its own totalization, makes its reductive map incrementally truer each time
it is used. The User clicks X, and X happens, and so the world has more X for this
and more images representing X-making interfacial tools, and so on. This recursion,
both mechanical and semantic, is how the Interface layer telescopes between the local
and global, enrolling its own resources and the User’s simultaneously to put both in
order according to the logic of that interfacial regime’s particular vocabulary of reduction. The ongoing competition between multiple platforms, both state and nonstate,
to define the nomos of The Stack includes a kaleidoscopic collection of interfacial
regimes, each projecting its own specific grids, one on top of the other, superimposing
their differing self-referential claims on the nomination and arrangement of various
territories. Critically, because their comprehensive images are not merely descriptive of what they diagram but are driven by a motivated narrativization of The Stack
as a totality for Users to make and remake it over and over, they are ripe for investment by utopian imaginaries.40 Interfaces are composed images of an encapsulated
totality in the here and now, but they can also function as projective total images
of a world clarified—cleansed—according to its idealized master diagram. Whole
interfacial regimes can then function not unlike cosmograms, offering prototypical
geographies for worlds to come. The political volatility of a future interfacial regime
is not only in the drawing of an imaginary resolution directly overlapped onto the
real and available landscape, but also its technical ability to affect those realities by
User action. When counterprograms for the whole world are drawn from acutely selfserving platform strategies or from delusional political and theological doctrines, then
whole User populations can lose the interpretive distance between a merely tactical
reductive description of the world on the one hand, and its ecstatic idealization or
exploitative distortion on the other (more on this phenomenon below). In that such
futural projective images of utopian totalities are, like all such graphical interfacial
tools, not only simulations but also fantastic instruments aimed directly toward The
Stack’s megastructure, this is perhaps, for better or worse, the most essential productive accident of the Interface layer.

236

Interface Layer

55. Interfaces in The Stack 2: Apps and Programming the Space at Hand
I shift the discussion here from the theory of Interfaces in general to a study of the
App, an important type of everyday interface sitting between the User in motion and
the rest of The Stack. What are Apps? On the one hand, Apps are software applications
and so operate within something like an application layer of a specific device-to-Cloud
economy. However, because most of the real information processing is going on in the
Cloud, and not in the device in your hand, the App is really more an interface to the
real applications hidden away in data centers. As an interface, the App connects the
remote device to oceans of data and brings those data to bear on the User’s immediate interests; as a data-gathering tool, the App sends data back to the central horde in
response to how the User makes use of it. The App is also an interface between the User
and his environment and the things within it, by aiding in looking, writing, subtitling,
capturing, sorting, hearing, and linking things and events. Depending on how it senses
the world, the App mediates between User and environment, and so also between the
Cloud layer and that particular environment via the User. Accordingly, it renders the
habitat to the User and the User to the habitat, and it does this in ways that may be
variously exacting or vague, prescriptive or reactive.
This dynamic of embodied prescription is built into the habitus/habitat circuit of
geolocative Apps in particular, and especially, perhaps, those that superimpose descriptive layers on a device’s mobile camera view.41 We should consider with caution (and a
bit of awe) how emergent genres of Apps that project interfacial elements onto what is
seen through the device’s eye, including augmented reality (AR) may come to radicalize
absolutist and fundamentalist dispositions by making them seem real. These may be
sacred or secular visions, inspired by religious or politics or economics, and may also
spawn bizarre and as yet unimagined new Cloud/AR-based politico-theological mutations (this is discussed in more detail below). In many AR applications, synthetic textual annotation of the world is fused with direct perception, and for these Apps, visual
symbols don’t signify things as much as they are directly laminated onto real things in
real situations. As these Apps become more commonplace, how might this collapse of
representational distance within the immediate perceptual field undermine the power
of metaphor and contingent interpretation to guide User thought and action? Does
an immanent and tactile sign demand a more exact duty from the believing reader?
It seems likely that selecting from a categorized interface, like a GUI’s choice-array of
menus and buttons, must work differently when that interface is perceived as a real
object out in the world, as opposed to a screen event at a distance that merely refers
to things iconographically. More troubling is when its annotations are labeling and
dividing not just commodity X from event Y, but instead the absolute categories of the
sacred and the profane, clean things from unclean things, our land and their bodies.
Seeing the world through such an apparatus, can the primate brain manage to keep the

Interface Layer

237

critical space of doctrinal metaphor open against absolutism? Does it want to? Are the
User’s cognitive abilities extended by this reality, or are they amputated?
But first, we will unpack Apps and App platform economies within a mobile ecology
of interfaces. Compared to most consumer software, an App is tiny. The Google Earth
iOS App puts a genuinely total geography into your pocket for a mere 29.5 megabytes.42
It can do this because most of the significant information that the App displays is
stored, calculated, and served from the Cloud layer. The App is a thin membrane on
top of a vast machine, but one that nevertheless allows its User to pilot and be piloted
by that machine with the slightest gesture. It is at the intersection point between these
two far more complex reservoirs of intelligence: the intentional User and the Cloud and
Stack infrastructure on which the little App is perched. As that tiny membrane, it can
synthesize and make useful vast continents of data and computational intelligence
gathered from afar in the instance of a single User interaction, and so the real utility
of a single piece of code that the App may contain vastly outleverages its relative parsimony. For this, an App condenses the Interface layer within the larger Stack, pitched
between User and the Addresses that link the User to the Cloud, City, or environmentally
embedded software. Within the governance logic of platforms, an App then transforms
and translates some capacity of the Cloud, rendering and framing it for the User as an
at-hand service. In turn it also draws the interactions of the User into a larger aggregation of data (e.g., location, path, preference), capitalizing their qualities and feeding the
updated information back to the User in a virtuous loop. Whatever the App happens
to be interfacing (geolocative routing, portable banking services, stored files, news or
music streams, site-specific games) is provided to the User as a Cloud-based service. In
that the service is provided to a device-User that is in motion, moving through the City
layer and encountering different contexts on the go, the App platform provides that
provisional link between a preexisting physical spatial context and this User-directed
overlay of a Cloud service onto immediate circumstances. As discussed in the City layer
chapter, there is then a kind of programmatic blending between the urban situation
through which a User moves and the interactions he may be having with a specific App
and Cloud service. A mall becomes a game board, a sidewalk becomes a banking center,
a restaurant becomes the scene of a crime in a crowd-sourced recommendation engine,
birds are angry and enemies are identified, and the experience of these may be very different for different people and purposes. At any given moment, multiple Users interacting with different Apps in the same place may have brought their shared location into
contrasting Cloud dramas; one may be ensconced in a first-person shooter game and
the other in measuring his carbon footprint, further fragmenting any apparent solidarity of the crowd. With billions of Users wielding mobile Apps at a time, and to varying degrees navigating their domains accordingly, it is certain that over time, physical
habitats are also remade as architectural-scale Cloud hardware. They are not just where
Cloud Polis works; they are a physical extension of it. As a blended coprogramming of

238

Interface Layer

space and software, habitat and habitus, the terrain modulates itself to the dictates of
the navigation tool, a thin, User-facing membrane of a larger Cloud platform. The App
is therefore not just the interface through which the User works on the world; it is also
the aperture through which the Cloud (and The Stack) redraws the City and its Users.
Back to Serres’s parable, the App also transforms the ubiquitous device into a modulation of the hand, and so over time, it will also dissipate the hand as machines settle
into another kind of User agency. The platform structure of App, device, plus Cloud
locates global computing directly into the palm of the ambulatory User. The mobile
device, not laptops or desktop machines, is the first and still primary computing experience for most Earthlings. In this natural motion, the App interface on the device
(what some still insist on calling a “phone”) is often a kind of extension of the hand.
It points, grabs, selects, draws lines, pushes, and pulls. It may also extend the eye and
the ear, the voice and even the skin, but the combination of a Cloud platform device
that can alter its function to suit a near-infinite range of potential challenges (over 1.4
million Apps approved for the Apple App Store in early 2015) suggests comparison with
Serres’s characterization of the hand as a technology that is “never finished” because
it is so adaptable to new uses instead of being held to a fixed niche. The mobile device
has a similar generic anatomy, as the App enables an endless array of techniques, simulating the palm, finger, or fist, and so the device “at hand” extends the work of the
natural hand to inscribe and coax digital information into and out of the pathways of
the world.
Beyond the single device, the platform logic of the App can be, and is already,
extended from the mobile deck into a wider range of machines and networks. Some
doctors prescribe health care Apps in addition to medications as part of a therapeutic regime, and the race to design low-cost clinical tools (a “tricorder”) redefines the
administration of medical equipment.43 Cars are already App platforms, but the real
innovation in specific Apps for transportation hardware is still to come. Driverless cars
(or cars that are simply more autonomous along a generic spectrum) would change
what passengers are expected to do and not do while hurtling through the City layer
and on what events they are expected to focus their attention. Apps that connect cars
to work or play, some using windows as screens, will, for better or worse, further virtualize the experience of automotive drift. Some cars might be bound to an Android or
iOS platform lock-in, or new manufacturer-specific operating systems might support
neither or both, but cars already contain multiple software and hardware systems, and
by extending these to control how cars navigate streets and how passengers interact
with the world and one another, it’s not difficult to see how the redefinition of “a car”
as a high-velocity computing platform, enveloping the user inside, initiates new genres
of in-motion Apps. As it does for the mobile device, this would redefine the individual
car, or a swarm of cars, into another kind of hardware-extended habitat of a wider Cloud
platform. As the single “car” becomes a fast and heavy computer that you can sit down

Interface Layer

239

in, so do “cars” also become components of the larger computational network infrastructure. But here the anthropocentric bias of construing the User as necessary like a
human, who extends his primate hand into the world, reaches an impasse. Cars with
Apps, medical devices with Apps, or any machine with Apps also suggest design assignments for modular forms of bottom-up artificial intelligence. Any machine, whether
general or highly specific, could be imbued with the narrowly focused intelligence
of the App linked to a wider Cloud and could download any particular sensing, sensory, storing, calculative, or transmission function programmed for it. Each can do
that without addressing humans or requesting our interference in the communication
flow between machine User and Cloud. The most important, viable, and effective Apps
and App market platforms may serve the nonhuman Users that interface across scales
and systems—manufacturing, logistics, healthcare, transportation, agriculture, retail
service—by linking and delinking modular functions of component machines working in interoperable concert.44 In this economy, the universal flexibility of the “hand”
dissipates into a more open field of tactical computation animating all programmable
platform components more equally. As any piece of equipment, regardless of its shape
or mammal origin, can be augmented by downloading a needed App function, it too
can now serve any number of unexpected niches.
56. Interfaces in the Stack 3: Theo-Interfaciality
This slow transference of the human body onto a landscape of software subroutines is
not limited to the hand. It also includes other forms of embodied thought and intelligence, but the blossoming of fully fledged nonhuman Apps does nothing to prevent
traditional anthropocentric Apps from operating with the full spectrum of stupidity
that our species is capable of bringing forth, and among these are doctrinal cognitive
fundamentalisms. Etymologies of “religion” describe a binding and a rebinding of a
community of belief, or of a bond between a believer and a covenant or commitment.
The repetition of prayer, of ritual, of weekly services is all testament to the procedurality of the sacred. These are techniques of anamnesis and the invested memorialization
of the divine into sites and objects. For example, by sublation the Eucharist involves
the masses of the Mass into a divine symbolic cannibalism, and through this, the spectacle of sacrifice and resurrection at the core of Christianity is repeated over and over
again. Rebinding upon rebinding, there is the first incanted memorialization of Christ’s
body into the bread and wine, and the second memorialization in the devout cycle of
the eating and drinking these every Sunday. Are these processes of binding the social
at work in The Stack? In his essay “Religion in the Age of Digital Reproduction” (and
his book Google: Words Beyond Grammar), Boris Groys laments the eclipse of anamnesis
by software regimes that do the work of memory and memorialization on the User’s
behalf.45 We, the Users of Google, need not exercise our faculties of memory in order

240

Interface Layer

to remember anything, it seems, and so the mind is free to wander through a vast flat
moment, presented as an endless archive. As Groys tells it, the devout need not consciously perform the work of memorialization, or even really comprehend the work
that is done for them, when it is sufficient, for example, to download a portfolio of
important texts and carry them along on one’s hard drive.46 He shakes his head in pity
at his wannabe-extremist students for whom it’s enough to possess copies of incendiary,
uncompromising (unread) PDFs on their laptops in order for the act of identification to
stick, or so they think; radicals not even radicalized, merely fanboy collectors.47 Groys
laments that without the necessary and difficult investment of interpretation and an
exacting self-transformation into the position of faith through the physical training of
repetition and memorialization, however arbitrary it may be, then the rebinding (and
the religion itself) is empty. By this view, today’s Cloud theology without anamnesis
is actually a self-dispossession of commitment by which the experience of faith, now
without opinion or interpretation, is outsourced to cognitive prostheses. Devout Apps
can have devout opinions for you. For Groys, this subcontracting is not just an externalized memorialization of belief into digital artifacts, a sacralization of interfaces with
theological distinction; it is, rather, religion evacuated of religio. Even if so, it does not
mean that such interfaces cannot also motivate extraordinary acts of motivated devotion and violence.
The mobilization of automated opinionlessness is perhaps most clearly illustrated
by a subgenre of Apps that uses the device’s built-in camera to superimpose interfacial
content on top of the ambient world as perceived by the user, such as for AR. As mentioned, the layer of interfacial icons and indexes on a given perceptual field transforms
it by subtitling objects and events, offering navigational tools, overlaying GUI menus
on real-world systems, cinematic insertions, and elisions, and other artificial sensations by which the ambiguities of local signification and significance are eliminated for
the User. The ultimate effect of this programming may be to transform semiotic techniques into direct ideological, even theological, articulations of the world. Whereas
for tangible media and conformal computing, interfaciality melts into tactile objects,
for AR interfaciality melts into the perceived surfaces of objects and environments. In
extending the cinematic language of new media, AR is an aggressive subtitling of the
phenomenal world now rendered as interactive narrative. It does this in ways that
may be highly contextual, or perhaps instead according to a strange juxtaposition of a
description with what it describes, like a film subtitle with only tangential relation to
the screen image and event.48 For the latter, the User is thrown into confusion, forced
to not only interpret the correlation between the interface and the world but perhaps
to invent one on the fly, relying only on his own actual thinking. In most cases, however, semiotic correlation is easy, and it is the absence of any work of interpretation, of
reading even, that would characterize a successful AR User experience. The job of the
software is to explain what is seen and to automate active sorting of how it should be

Interface Layer

241

encountered, valued, and qualified—with reverence, indifference, or violence. As religio, or for the Schmitt App, AR draws lines and differentiates friend and foe, automating even intentional belief, subcontracting the neocortex’s manipulation of metaphor,
offloading it to the algorithms strapped to your face.
As operative for the Interface layer within The Stack, AR performs the imagistic
and linguistic mediation between Users (one layer above) and the ubiquitous computational capacities of their habitats (one layer below). As a design space, it is a way
to stage, animate, compose, and account for communication between Users and their
worlds, and unlike traditional mechanical or screen-based user interfaces, it performs
this as artificially embodied perception; it is a new genre of physical cinema in which
spaces between fantasy and projection are collapsed.49 In AR, just as for the interfacial
image in general, its descriptions of space also become a medium for the recursive reinscription of a broader politico-geographic diagram back on the world through its direct
instrumentalization as an interface.50 Put another way, AR Apps, in all their baroque
banality, augment the world more than they augment vision. As we define the interface
as any point of contact that governs the conditions of exchange between two complex
systems, then within AR, the GUI melts, so it seems, into reality itself, and is seen as
another property of surfaces, things, and events. That melting becomes the scope of
design, the registration of labor, the touchpoint of advertising, and even (perhaps especially) the domain of activist belief, sacred and secular. Slavoj Žižek’s definition of “the
Real” as that which is negatively defined by fantasy is here given a literal, if dull, gloss.51
If so motivated, we could then locate AR among modern media and their psychological or psychoanalytic effects and might say, in line with Friedrich Kittler’s association
of film with the imaginary, the typewriter with the symbolism and the gramophone
with the real, that in AR, the imaginary is so directly inscribed into the symbolic, as the
content of the interface, that the real is also itself collapsed into the imaginary, making
the reality of AR perhaps irredeemably occult.52
One supposes that the most pressing and initial nonaccident of AR is a deeply granular and pervasive advertising by which our embodied perceptions and gestures generate
the monetizable surplus platform value of the network User profile, but it should not be
confused with the technology’s ultimate social impact.53 AR is where the microtargeting business models of cognitive capitalism melt into the choreography of the mobile
User-subject. The effort that the User already makes to perfect targeting algorithms for
search engines, in exchange for useful search results, can be scaled from finger points
and clicks to the very musculature and dance of dwelling itself. However, a less secular
danger is latent in AR in that its most killer application would prove to be not marketing but those fundamentalist religion and politics (as well as security Apps and their
monetizations) by which the segmentation of the polis into friend and enemy becomes
a direct literal annotation of the lifeworld (again, clean and unclean, ours and theirs,
empire and rebel forces, kill it or eat it, and so on.) It is then with a lack of astonishment

242

Interface Layer

that we note that Google’s inaugural AR game is based on a science-fiction alien religious warfare story embedded into the lived urban fabric. Developed as part of its internal Niantic Labs, Ingress divides users into two opposing camps: Enlightened (green)
and Resistance (blue). Players “enclose regions of territory on the surface of the earth
with virtual links between virtual portals, which are visible in the game software. The
top-level goal of the game is for one’s faction to control large numbers of Mind Units,
the estimated number of humans within the regions of territory controlled by the faction.”54 It should be a surprise only for those who have not realized that Star Wars is
an al-Qaeda-esque parable (rural religious cult flies into the architectural core of the
empire and blows it up) that the Manichean ludic demands of Ingress are to send people
out into their cities training them to see, attack, and defend against the territorial
incursions of enemies perceivable only through special software-enabled perspectives.55
Will mature AR initiate a wave of bizarre new sects, scams, and activist versions of
fundamentalist monotheisms and ideologies for which the metaphorical nuance of
holy books is collapsed by the direct imprint of virtual words onto real things?56 There
are some indications that this is so. We can see the use of Google Earth, Google Maps,
stolen SIM cards, and other advanced off-the-shelf spatial command and communication technologies by, for example, Lashkar-e-Taiba during their attack on Mumbai in
2008, as a prototype of the weaponized AR that concerns us.57 The dozen attackers
used these tools to see and navigate the city, identifying targets and keeping a closed
communication loop intact (to what extent any given technology was employed, we
can only speculate based on press and court accounts). One assumes that their movements were planned beforehand to advance through the overhead and tilted satellite
images of the city’s buildings, streets, alleys, and squares. As much as classified reconnaissance, simulation, and situational-awareness tools are war technologies for states,
declassified tools can be for nonstate actors; and the trail of representation and counterrepresentation of contested space through these specific tools and specific events is
knotted. For example, in Mumbai, Google Earth was a mechanism of the attack itself,
but news agencies also mapped the attacks in near real time using Google Earth as part
of their own coverage. In this awkward recursion, satellite views of the City layer serve
as medium of violence by those who would enact it, witness it, report it, or defend
against it, as Google Earth’s cosmograms are deployed by politico-theological geographies that may appear at first to be outside its intended program.58 Here a proto-AR is
not only the territorial index through which such projections play themselves out; it
is, as much as the City that it maps, the very means to project their activist and in this
case irredentist imagination.
This episode is a more violent and extreme variation of a Christianist AR overlay
of the Grand Canyon in Arizona that explains how the canyon proves creationism
and disproves evolution for those willing to peer through the looking glass and see
what it sees.59 An App simply called The Bible is already installed on over 100 million

Interface Layer

243

devices and helps its Users navigate their days according to a personalized devotional
itinerary, positioning them into the rhythms of religio as they move about, and translating various homilies into a closely curated experience of the everyday.60 We anticipate
that Apps like these may innovate a close integration with the geolocative tracking to
enforce by surveillance a particular pathway though City space, knowing and logging
whether Users went to good places or bad places and inferring behavior accordingly,
perhaps suggesting the confession of sins as appropriate. The automation of repentance
can now be based on real evidence of wrongdoing instead of the unreliable guilty conscience of individual worshippers. Perhaps the tallying of sins was the first big data play
(numinous omniscience as panopticon archive), but now it can be done with greater
worldly precision as repentance is now supported by information visualization. In time
geotheological innovation may give us new commandments and invented prohibitions based on the ability to trace movements through the City layer. Today there are
many widely used Apps that provide some moral frame, for example, Qibla direction
indicated from any spot on Earth, and others that allow users to scan bar codes to
determine if food is kosher or halal, or vegan, free-range, or GMO free, or if your new
colleague is a “suppressive person,” or even perhaps if he is a Cylon (or if you happen to be a Cylon, if someone shares your particular form of monotheism), and they
all may seem benign and obvious. Most are. But once again, one truly hopes that the
poetry and metaphor of the monotheistic cognitive cultures that they reference can
withstand the unambiguous literalism that AR might afford them and the violence
that absolute explication demands of adherents. Interfacial regimes such as these are
more than visual technologies; they are indeed cosmograms (Umberto Eco’s 1984 essay
arguing that Mac is Catholic and DOS is Protestant isn’t obsolete; it’s prophetic).61 As
the spawn of logistical aesthetics, these regimes are not only a programmatic diagram
of how a particular machine network works but, in aggregate, of how the world works
and what its proper configuration is or should be, and what is to be done about it, right
here and now, by you. It is this capacity to project an alternative global space, in some
cases a vision of purified utopia, through an interfacial system of symbols that are also
active tools, that allows AR and similar interfaces to function as theological media.
Utopian political theology becomes projective interfacial geography, and vice versa in
some cases. This is borne out by observing that any closed self-referential platform is
also a belief circle. Other much stranger platforms to come will certainly coalesce as
belief circles as well, and together they will help design, map by map, the spaces over
which the geopolitics of The Stack is claimed and contested.
57. Geoscapes: Interfaces Drawing Worlds
That an interfacial regime could encode the world so as to activate an archaic imagined
community, or even to conjure a new one, in no way guarantees that absolutist and

244

Interface Layer

fundamentalist cultures will determine the future of the platform. In no way does it
prevent it either. Just as for older forms of “new media,” such as the transistor radio,
which provided a singular voice and explanation for tumultuous political change, the
results can be as dramatic as they are contradictory. Such precedents provide models, especially those that demonstrate the role of a motivated imagination, aligned
with rote determination, in the mobilization of fabulous media. For example, in the
short span from D-Day to decolonization, France was on both sides of transistor radio’s
power to script and mobilize the national imagination. De Gaulle came to national
prominence through his broadcasts to occupied France from London during World
War II, giving a semiofficial voice to the occupied nation. By the late 1950s, pirate
broadcasts to contraband radios also played a role in the organization of Algerian independence from colonial France. As Franz Fanon relates it, the Voice of Fighting Algeria
(VFA) was a pirate radio project set up by relatively disorganized resistance fighters
to spread news about the military and cultural struggles of Algerian nationalist forces
in response to the press (and public meetings) blackouts imposed by the occupation
forces. In lieu of other public venues, the broadcasts contributed to the shape and
mobility of the imaginary battalion of resistance for its listeners.62 The voice of the VFA
was even given a role in Gillo Pontecorvo’s classic simulationist film, Battle of Algiers, in
which street-fighters are shown to stop, listen, or follow the explanatory cues of a nondiegetic and disembodied commander-narrator.63 In effect, the Algerian public came to
order in thinking that there was a strong, effective military resistance in early battles
with the French when there was not, largely because the radio Users, already literate
in the fantastic narrative, conceived there to be one. While Algerians previously had
little interest in the radio receiver device in their homes, the VFA broadcasts allowed
for its enthusiastic inclusion. Fanon writes that through the broadcasts, “the nation’s
speech, the nation’s spoken words gave it shape.” Crowded around receiver sets, listeners actively formulated that voice:
This voice, often absent, physically inaudible, which each one felt welling up within himself,
founded on an inner perception of the Fatherland, became materialized in an irrefutable way.
Every Algerian, for his part, broadcast and transmitted the new language and the reality of the
renewed nation. ...The radio receiver guaranteed this true lie. Every evening from nine o’clock to
midnight, the Algerian would listen. At the end of the evening, not hearing the Voice, the listener
would sometimes leave the needle on a jammed wavelength or one that simply produced static,
and would announce that the Voice of the combatants was here. For an hour the room would
be filled with the piercing, excruciating din of the jamming. Behind each modulation, each active crackling, the Algerian would imagine not only words, but concrete battles. The war of the
sound waves in the gourbi, re-enacts for the benefit of the citizen the armed clash of his people
and colonialism. As a general rule, within this marvelous psychopathology, it is the Voice of Algeria which wins out. ...Very often, only the operator, his ear to the receiver, had the un-hoped
for opportunity of hearing the Voice. The other Algerians in the room would receive the echo

Interface Layer

245

through the privileged interpreter, who, at the end of the broadcast was literally besieged. Specific
questions would be asked of this incarnated voice. ... [If something specific had not been heard],
by common consent, after an exchange of views, it would be decided that the Voice had in fact
spoken of those events, but that the interpreter had not caught the transmitted information, and
that the preferred outcome had been relayed.64

Fanon’s account gives a glimpse of the future politics of the Interface layer of The
Stack. Whereas radio relies on speech and active description, AR provides direct and
automated perceptual annotation; however, just as for Fanon’s example, noise reinterpreted into essential significance will surely play a key role in the dissensual interfacial
politics to come. It should not be difficult to imagine two different AR regimes, both
describing the same City layer but with completely different maps of what is there, what
it means, and what interactions are rewarded or discouraged.65 In the tension between
two or more narratives, their diagrams not only describe events; as the medium of
some omniscient command, they also partially determine them. Pulling laws off from
the safety of the page and projecting them onto the surfaces of the real world is also to
alter their weight and accentuation. AR media don’t just imply their intentions for bodies in motion; they explicate them, and they don’t just signify power they pronounce
and program it in distributed cognition and artificial embodiment. AR adds the world
to the interface, as much as, if not more than, it adds the interface to the world. Regardless of whether any two alternate interfacial totalities are locked in a dualistic battle,
one drawn across the other in some friend/enemy division (as for a war of decolonization or for Ingress) the mingling of overlapping totalities brings some degree of noise
and ambiguity. Any given site in the City may be overcome by multiple competing
perceptual totalities, systems, or sovereign geographies, but for any of these, what are
the terms of encounter with the alien software platform and belief circle? Only war? If
this were so, then the societies sustained by these would be impossibly fragile. As the
Cloud layer may be where competing political geographies are interwoven, as for the
Sino-Google conflict, the Interface layer is where those overlaps are literally inscribed
at the level of everyday action. Again, each interfacial regime, total or not, articulates
its specific reductive version of the world in which its own geography is sovereign, and
through these diagrams, the User composes actions through The Stack that enforce and
reinforce that same totalizing worldview. But that any single User may be interpolated
not by one but by many such interfacial regimes at once, any one site is defined not
by purification but by the alloy of multiple totalities at once (even if each totality
would explicitly exclude the others in principle). The User must then manage more
than one exclusive totality at once, and the multiple identities and agencies that each
regime provides to the User position. Modus vivendi gets you through the day, as one
User occupies multiple walled gardens at the same time and place, as she co-occupies
them with other claimants, friends, and foes. This jumbling may be essential to how
The Stack works as a platform for totalities by cohering the agonistic and dissensual

246

Interface Layer

drawing of geographies, simultaneously exclusive and inclusive of one another. This
tangle of utopias is another integral accident of the Interface layer as it attempts to host
the various investments in this geography of multiple geographies.66
While The Stack is a real physical construction, it is also a canvas on which spatial
imaginaries are screened, and the spaces over which that competition moves and fills
what we call geoscapes. Why this term? Interfaces, and most especially interfaces like
AR, locate competing master dogmas not just about what the world does but what it
is about.67 This projective geographic image is one means by which specific interfacial
regimes govern the mediation of their Users, The Stack, and the parts of the world they
can access. The Interface, as an image of this territory, becomes a means by which territory is written and managed, and finally the medium through which other territories
are challenged and the whole apparatus is contested. To augment Arjun Appadurai’s
now canonical lexicon of “scapes,” I nominate this addition: geoscape. A geoscape is a
contested terrain of contested terrains, a shifting landscape made up of shifting landscapes: image maps, projections and plans, irredentist land claims, borders and jurisdictions, strata and striations, imagined worlds, macroeconomic forecasts, projected
homes and homelands, addressing systems, and various terra incognita. All of these
can, but need not necessarily, enter into irregular public exchanges whereby contrasted
spatializations are both supplied and demanded according to a panoply of capitals.
Compiled into one, geoscapes are a form of content that cannot not be designed and
designed for. They represent a population of territorial alphabets mutually interiorizing
and exteriorizing each other, which includes cosmograms, images of the entirety of
global space and the order that it is seen to frame, govern, and distribute. For example,
the revived global caliphate, as envisioned by the Lashkar-e-Taiba, ISIS, and some others, is an image of the whole world captured under a particular interpretation of Islam.
It is a cosmogram that describes, validates, motivates, and delimits their program by
its image and for this, we have to count their vision as kind of geopolitical design
agenda.68 Google, China, the US State Department, or a diasporic community lodged
in a remote enclave: each of these may have its own projective geographic solidarity in
play. Everywhere, as cosmograms fight it out with other cosmograms and with other
local situated claims, they compose together a cumulative territory of territories over
which such antagonistic actors compete to enforce a primary, sovereign description of
the geographic distribution of things, location, distance, borders, and their significant
juxtapositions. Geoscapes comprise then both sacred and secular projections, as they
are in relation to one another: exceptional territories, patchworks of the enclave, and
exclave zones overflowing competing totalities.69 In turn, the inscriptions of the nomos,
drawing and framing sovereign interiors, can find traction to the extent that the surface on which it writes is recognized by its neighbors.
This multiplicity of territorial claims and types of claims is held in an overflowing and finally incommensurate, if also interdependent, polity of quasi-fictitious

Interface Layer

247

illustrations, and perhaps at the end of the day, this is all that geopolitics ever is.
Geoscapes are a conceptual assemblage of territorial claims as well as the conceptual
space that it might occupy. That is, the geoscape is not an empty arena into which
territories would move and be counted or installed, but an irregular territory never
empty but always exactly as full as the spaces that comprise it. Whatever highly conditional equivalence or exchange that exists is not an a priori feature but the result of
the real operations of encounter. Instead of being real spaces into which we might go,
geoscapes are entered into and so made real by their occupation. By contrast, other versions
cosmopolitanism presuppose global space as a self-evident panorama into which politics might take place. They often depend on representations of that space derived from
mapping platforms that are supposedly so secular and neutral that they can absorb
and position all interested geographies that might course through them (something
perhaps like Google Earth). However, geoscapes emerge from a more agonistic politics
for which the juxtaposition of difference is not within a shared consensual mechanism,
not a spectrum of opinion inside a given frame, but is itself an irreducibly dissensual
array of positions without a common master plane of situation. The geoscape extends
in all possible directions at once and is held only by the tensile strength of the imagined geographies that compose it by their co-occupation. One geography on another,
interfacial regimes interlace but cannot ultimately resolve into any last instance. Their
geopolitics are driven instead by a generic fissiparousness, and so while any given interfacial image map may be (part of) a total image, the cumulative incongruity of multiple
totalities renders every whole only partial. The geoscape stages these incommensurate
projections, including those that deny the legitimacy or even existence of other projections with which they share the same physical location, and it is that incompatibility,
the noisy grinding of incompatible terms for addressing things, events, and territory,
that is, in practice, the engine of geopolitical design.
For this turbulent territorial economy, some purposes may be intentionally designed
while others seem to emerge as organic mutations in response to apparently normal
conditions. In the case of the Mumbai attacks in 2008, the cosmopolitan platform of
Google’s interfacial regime is used to serve a reactionary vanguardism, a future-historical irredentist imaginary projecting backward into an alternative past or future, so as
to arrive back at the desired state condition (one, of course, with very different conditions for states). When advanced technologies of globalization, closely associated with
secular cosmopolitics, are employed opportunistically by political theologies for their
own particular purposes, then unplannable and unresolved territories, jurisdictions,
and programs are put in play. Truth be told, such monster projections and warring
claims on space are also generative of the essential qualities of the spatial as a political
medium. As we might hope to guide a comprehensive geopolitical design of The Stack,
now constructed piecemeal all around us, we confront the perilous legacy of atavistic
political utopias of the past and the present and how they force us to question the

248

Interface Layer

logic or purpose of totality in geopolitical and political theological thought in general.
Totalities (plural) are everywhere. In the Mumbai example, the lesson of the interoperation of seemingly incommensurate layers of the geoscape—the archaic and the ultracontemporary—is less that jihad could “fit inside” Google Earth than Google Earth fit
inside the conceptual jihadi map of a caliphate-to-come and the situation of Mumbai
within it.70 One partition folds and is folded into another, from Kashmiri valleys to
hotel rooms in Mumbai, to privatized satellite data, to interaction design conventions,
technologies, and accidents and embryonic formats of extrastate citizenship emerging from one from another. In this, the contradictions of The Stack’s totalizations are
made clearer. As we contemplate a future Stack geography, we recognize that nothing
guarantees designable outcomes. As played out over and again, modernity is itself an
open platform for the design and development of antimodern designs. Not only does
modernity disembed and reembed traditional social forms, traditional and fundamentalist social forms also disembed and reembed modernity.
Put into sharper relief by the Mumbai attacks is the volatile economy of contemporary warfare: contested urbanity, exceptional violence, civil architecture, geographic
projection, networked software, motivated interfacial maps, all rolled into one. For
this, Lashkar-e-Taiba is, among other things, also a sort of politico-theological urban
design practice. It is one that follows maps and plans, that creates them, challenges
received maps that draws them and makes them real, and is clearly willing to die over
them. Obviously the tactical use of Google Earth in providing situational awareness
during the attack was a practical choice, and in no way do I suggest that it is their literal
intention to remap the caliphate directly onto Google Earth, making the software some
new sort of illuminated Word. I am also not blaming Google. Instead, I observe that the
ultimate asymmetry between these two spatial logics, jihad and Google, is less absolute
than we might presume, and in their unlikely compatibility and alignment, something
critical about how geoscapes operate above and beneath the state is discovered. Because
they must be reductive in order to even work as interfacial regimes, even those secular
interactive cartographies are not a truly universal plane into which all competing political ontologies can be embedded and arranged; rather, the polyphonous perversion of
their translatability, even and especially into anticosmopolitan fundamentalisms, is
the means by which the geopolitics is given form.
These slippages depend on the immediacy of the interfacial image, as both a technique for spatial inscription and a screen on which a geographic imagination is projected. The Interface layer is simultaneously a site for the direct aggregation of flows, a
technique for the representation of those assemblages, and a vocabulary of contentious
alternatives. It is the social need for total images of dispersed assemblages and invisible
interfacial chains that makes an economy of purified imagined geographies possible.
The Interface layer becomes a medium not only for the transmission of utopian images
but for the composition of utopian spaces. Whereas the nomos of The Stack refers to

Interface Layer

249

an ordinate, enumerated spatial logic, geoscape names the agonistic territorial images
of the world, any of which may be a direct expression of the architectures of The Stack,
or which may be driven by another doctrine or megastructure. When the terms of
geoscapes are contested through the instrumental images of an interfacial regime, the
geographic framings of the Earth can congeal into total and cosmographic diagrams.
As active instruments, those projective and idealized inscriptions are more than maps;
they are also the means to realize their particular compositional arguments about how
the world should be idealized; the interface becomes the very tool to bring about the
conceptual arrangement that it would want to represent. At the same time, images of
interfaces come to connote futuristic speculative design. From summer movie science
fiction to corporate vision of future marketing videos, advanced GUIs have become part
of the global visual culture, signifying expressivity, contemporaneity, security, omniscience, secrecy, and, most of all, a future world in which frustrated desire and agency
are resolved by graceful and powerful technical apparitions-to-come.71 For these, the
drawing medium of the interfacial regime takes leave of any immediate machinic purpose and serves instead a dreamworld canvas on which utopian social relations are
evoked. In this utopian cinematic subgenre, if possible geographies are prototyped for
later instantiation as geoscapes demanding enforcement, they are first drawn into fantastic infrastructures, transhumanist overcoming, transcendental experiences of speed
and immersion, and calming day-in-the-life use for personal control, ease, clarification,
groundedness, and affluence. In these clairvoyant fictions, we see how techniques of
the Interface layer, especially GUI, are mobilized toward the management of platforms
that may almost exist, but are at least partially illegible or unresolved and so demand
our active participation, even vigilance. They are the visual languages available with
which to explore, express, and communicate unrealized desires and ambitions for realities only imagined and wished for, which find shape as design fictions and so have
permission to absorb utopian and dystopian energies at that level. The real complexity
of discontiguous assemblage lines and interfacial chains requires that fictional resolution of the interfacial diagram in order for Users to comprehend and participate within
them, and the utopian projection of fictional alternatives to these uncertain social and
technical conditions onto surfaces of real technologies of interfaces is how they articulate those wishes. The agonistic politics of geoscapes and their claims on the territories
of The Stack oscillate back and forth between both of these projects. The inspired utopian interfacial landscape-to-come (from Thomas More’s diagrams of the island Utopia
to Tony Stark’s schematics for an omnipotent heads-up display) is also a geoscape-tocome specified by the images that would reflect and represent it.72 They conceive possible technology and possible social connections, possible powers and abilities, possible
sovereignties and polities, and possible social realities to be drawn.
This is unavoidable, and so let’s not avoid it. Any sovereign claim over a space is
first a claim to define that space as such, and that ontological gesture is as necessary

250

Interface Layer

for satellite photography and Internet addressing protocols as it is for monotheistic
political theology, even as their claims may be heterodox and irresolvable and in fact
because they are. In the balance between an infrastructure over which territorial claims
are made and an infrastructure through which those claims are drawn, the ultimate
geopolitical design of The Stack can’t possibly be decided in advance. Too many inversions are part of the process, and yet it is clear that our existing geopolitical machines
desperately require intervention at scale. And so the interfacial regimes that give narrative form to The Stack are image-instruments of governance both here and now and
yet to come, and for this, perhaps their momentum is too fast and their topography
too dispersed for states to capture on their own, and too bound up with slow-to-change
human anthropology for algorithmic Cloud platforms to merely abscond with them. At
the same time, these instabilities are also what give stability to the whole. As The Stack
has elevated interfacial diagrams to the status of planetary infrastructure, linking event
to image with the ambient interfaces and habitats of the City layer, it coheres Users
around generic experiences of social confusion that may still germinate new forms of
political universality. This productive dissensus will remain open as long as the political architectures of The Stack can situate multiple jurisdictional claims and generate
new jurisdictional strata where none existed, such that no single combination can
finally resolve into a consensus sovereignty of last instance (or last resort). This defense
against totalitarianism comes not from any axiomatic reverence for nonhierarchical
horizontality but from the multiplication of verticalized totalities one on another. In
that each of us, as a User, is also a living site over which that dissensus competes—not
only over the right of legitimate violence, but also of the right of legitimate citizenship
and political agency—then our own immediate experience of our interfacial regimes
demands from us the management of several often incompatible personal identities,
perched within these double-exposed platform totalities. It is the condition of any site,
including any single User, to be enrolled into more than one regime at once and to
suffer or enjoy a surplus of utopian total images, dual and treble citizenships, and fractured and noisy names and aliases. As discussed in the following chapter, on the last
and top layer of The Stack this confusion first compels an overidentification with the
reflective contours of User subjectivity, which is then followed by a more productive
dissolution of the User-subject back into the indifferent churn of worldly interfaciality.

User Layer

The modern sovereign state and the modern autonomous individual (have codetermined) each
other’s emergence.
—Michel Foucault, The Birth of Biopolitics1
… I marveled that these bits and pieces stayed isolated one from another, held the same shapes
for so long, that the labeling of individual aliquots of biomass actually served a useful purpose.
—Peter Watts, “The Things”2

Among the accomplishments of the Enlightenment, one amplified considerably by
industrial apparatuses, is the dubious fabrication of the atomized human individual, a
magical figure separated from the world by his mastery over it.3 This construct is resistant to implications of Copernican traumas, as it continues to appreciate not only
humanity but individual humans at the radiant center of the action.4 As this figure
came to organize systems in its own image, its synthetic replication through microeconomics and social psychology set the stage for its cohesion into what is called, by
design, the User. In practice, however, the User is not a type of creature but a category
of agents; it is a position within a system without which it has no role or essential
identity. Think of the Apollo astronaut, the Vitruvian Man of the McLuhan era, floating in space wrapped in a body-shaped bubble and linked by his umbilical tube to the
mother ship. The astronaut is not the somatic homo economicus denuded of dependencies; he is rather a composite effect of interlocking organic and inorganic skins
and metabolisms, from the mechanical life-support systems without which his bubble
bursts to the trillions of microbes inside his gut without which his body will fail more
slowly. Even the space cowboy’s role as “pilot” of his spaceship its debatable. Recent
scholarship underscores that ground control and on-board computers did the bulk of
the work to land the Apollo assemblage onto Earth’s moon and that the human hood
ornaments sent up with them were also marketing devices to ensure a species-centric
exploration narrative.5 Remember too that the first earthlings launched into outer
space were not humans; they were monkeys, dogs, microbes, robots, and others. We

252

User Layer

stand in their place, as much as they did in ours (even here on Earth, inside our atmospheric skins, we are all already astronauts).6 Another view would foreground how the
human mind, body, and species, while appearing as the center of phenomena and
perception, is instead, like all other matter, an open field irreducibly dependent on
forces both larger and smaller than its own shell. This cascade of Copernican traumas—from Darwinian evolution to postcolonial and ecological inversions, to transphylum neuroscience and synthetic genomics, from nanorobotics to queer artificial
intelligence—should erode conceptual models of the atomic individual human as
historical actor (easy come, easy go). Instead, the conceptual gravity of the humanist illusion not only persists, but seems to draw some dark nourishment from these
shocks. The more that the fantasy is disenchanted, the more entrenched the borderlines of what makes people “special” and the more that the hallucinated autonomy
provides mystical shelter from the storm. Through it, the individual sees his poetic
reflection everywhere, including in the positions configured for it as User of the systems on which it is dependent. By contrast, the platform sovereignty of the User
in The Stack as identified for the Interface and City layers is derived not from some
essential dignity of the particular human who “uses,” but from the agency of the User
position in relation to the envelopes against which he or she or it is situated. Any
sovereignty of the User draws less probably from established legal rights than from the
contradictions and slippages between how formal citizens are provided access under
control regimes versus how platform envelopes provide access to all Users regardless
of formal political standing. One envelope may open up territories in ways the former cannot, and when it does, the position of the User is not just an empty suit, but
a point of leverage in reorganizing the political geography of The Stack. Even so, that
position never allows someone to enter into it fully formed; it also forms that person
(or thing) into shape as it provides them tactics for shifting systems and their apparatuses.7 In this, the User layer of The Stack is not where the rest of the layers are mastered by some sovereign consciousness; it is merely where their effects are coherently
personified.
This chapter focuses on Users (human or nonhuman) at the top layer up in The
Stack and how they are interpolated by The Stack as comparable and interchangeable
through various qualifications and quantifications of behaviors and impact. The User
of this layer is not the universal persona that collapses design research into reductive and manipulative psychologism, a fixed term toward which design must orient its
interfaces and artifacts, but as a model that is not given in advance and must be construed by interfaces and constructed for platforms. Its position at the top of The Stack,
where driving agency is situated momentarily, is slippery, fragile, and always enmeshed
in its own redefinition, an uncertainty that underwrites the formation of subjectivity
in general, always a manifest image cobbled in relation to available technologies of
self-reflection, from cave walls at Lascaux to Quantified Self Apps.8 The Quantified

User Layer

253

Self movement enrolls available digital tools into the willful fabrication of autonomic
self-interpolation and may be where the current political logic of the User reaches a
certain apotheosis. While the empirical tracking and analysis of one’s personal biological processes is surely diagnostically important in many ways, especially as such data
are aggregated and pluralized beyond private individuals by the surfacing of ecological,
economic, and microbial forces, but the currency of personal performance optimization leans toward something rather different. It elevates the principles of User-centered
design into an existential mandate for biological disclosure and epistemological closure
tuned to harmonize with the hyperindividuated self-regard native to the zones that
link transhumanism and Atlas Shrugged. I will argue that its animating desire for selfmastery through the quantification of system interactions over the course of autobiographical time is premised on a fundamental misrecognition—one for which the visual
coherency of the object tracked is taken as validation of the subjective coherency of the
“self” that stares back at it. As before, mirror reflection makes a false guarantee of the
self’s apparent outline.
For anything that is situated in the User layer of The Stack—he, she or it—the
interplay between technical delineation and stable self-image is volatile. In that it is
entwined with feedback loops up and down the layers, the position of User is obviously in some ways always “cybernetic,” but it does not bend toward any homeostasis
or necessary resolution. It is a limited effector of processes bubbling up and down
layer to layer. To and from its location, the User is both an initiator and an outcome
of those vertical paths that in the introductory chapter I called columns. But because
this is also where actual human beings are most unambiguously situated within The
Stack, it is also where political constitutions, end-user agreements, linguistic and
cognitive cultures, psychoanalytic conundrums, and so on, together structure how
platforms (including states) see Users and how Users model their own interests and
actions, as seen in Interfaces large and small. As a given column tracks up and down,
there is no single necessary path from layer to layer that must finally resolve a User
through Interfaces and Addresses, within a City and Cloud platform and all the way
down to the Earth layer. There are only possible routes among possible routes, and
the durable form of one layer might guarantee or prevent variation within another
layer that coexists with it in the same context. For example, one Cloud platform in
one City may provide very different sets of interfacial possibilities than it would in
another City, and in this case, it is a layer located well below the User and Interface
that frames and limits how social formations can and cannot cohere. What a state
sees or what any other Cloud platform sees is what it can see and wants to see through
its particular capacities of perception and institutional dispositions of looking as it
strategizes its own reflection up the columns toward the User. Looking back down, it
is the contact between the User and the Interface, the recursive image of The Stack’s
procedural totality, that informs how a User’s habits of thought and action, no matter

254

User Layer

how fantastic or delusional, become at least for a moment validated by the concreteness of global information infrastructure. Indeed, it should go without saying that
precisely because the claims by and for Users can be so diverse, and so deeply bound
to a dynamic heterogeneity of human cultures, the historical and political textures
of the User layer are also the most anthropologically complex. That said, where do
Users come from?
58. Origins of the User
Design has been an active participant in the formulation of the User as a privileged
and practical subject position. It has refined the construct over at least a century into
order to engineer the things that we all use every day—cars, globally unique identifiers (GUIs), hand tools, furniture, cities—by reflecting this shadowy hypothetical
identity back onto real people. As part of a design research process, the formal postulated ideal users for intended products, messages, or services are known as “personas.”
In 1955, for example, Industrial designer Henry Dreyfuss published his Designing for
People, which featured “Joe and Josephine,” two extraordinarily typical people, one
man and one woman, both described in minute detail. They would be used as the
literal ergonomic standards against which things might be made to measure. They
were, in this way, an Adam and Eve of use case personas. The premise of a scientific measurement of people and their movements as a way of designing systems to
accommodate or to train them goes back at least to the proportional guidelines of
Vitruvius’s Ten Books of Architecture (around 15 B.C.E.) and da Vinci’s Vitruvian Man
(1490); many other genealogical threads are not hard to identify. Foucault’s genealogies of modernity painstakingly recount how typical and normative human bodies
were served and served up by the design of disciplinary institutions of knowledge. By
observing machine shops and workers and replanning how their bodily movements
could be abstracted and optimized so as to be better incorporated with their laboring
habitats, Frederick Winslow Taylor pioneered scientific management theory and the
efficiency movement as the nineteenth century became the twentieth. Concurrently,
Max Weber would identify a tendency toward depersonalized rationalization through
the formulation of people into interchangeable bureaucratic components as a key
sociological feature of industrial capitalism. Paul Lazarsfeld’s audience studies for the
Princeton Radio Project (which momentarily included Theodor Adorno on the team)
was among many midcentury attempts to apply the scientific method to the deduction of typical patterns in consumer thought and behavior used as templates for the
formulation of products and propagandas. Information about audiences and Users
would be used to inspire and validate the authorship of representative fictional personas that stand for those people by typifying them as ad hoc archetypes.9 Later, the
requirements of software and interaction design came to rely on the specification of

User Layer

255

diverse groups of multiple hypothetical Users, each with different needs, all put into
overlapping fictional worlds where optimum click paths could be modeled, categorized, and used to perfect possible GUI solutions.10 Whereas Joe and Josephine were
absolutely generic, extranormal people, the complexities of designing dynamic interfacial systems means that any thing must be usable for people with heterogeneous
aptitudes and intentions. If you could make software just by measuring people’s fingers and eyeballs, things would be easy. But the design of interfaces that have to
link together various machines, forms of human cognition, and totalizing images of
logistical networks demands more nuanced abstractions and optimizations than ergonomic verification of the angle at which “Joe’s” elbow bends can tell us.
Today persona design and use case modeling is widely taught as a basic design
research methodology, and as a result, for better or worse, a plurality of our material
artifacts were conceived to suit the nuanced interests of completely fictional people
following fictional scenarios. We, the actual consumers, are the shadows of the personified simulations of ourselves. Now real-time Cloud-based User-response-driven systems (such as Google AdWords and geolocative advertising schemes) work to close
the gaps between upstream observation of Users and the microcustomization of services that are provided to them. Instead of abstracting a few typical personas out of
the patterns seen through cumbersome, representative studies (we hope), and then
designing offerings to suit those abstractions, the cycle between analysis and provision is more instantaneous. Whereas the standardization of large-scale industrial production demanded standardized Users, this is not as true for Stack economies. Instead
of one User served by her supposed resemblance to one of a handful of personas
derived from n population of all Users, Cloud platforms with access to each User’s specific profile (previous search history, purchases, geographic location, circle of friends)
can hypersegment services and content. The ratio between number of Users and possible personas is then trending toward a 1:1 ratio; your profile is your persona, and in
principle, every data User gets his or her own version of any offering. To be sure, this
doesn’t conclude but rather intensifies the interfacial apparatus processes of artificial
subjectivization.
“User” is a normative figure of subjective agency for The Stack, not just a dummy
sovereign held in an empty (if also supervisory) position at the head of a table with
words put in its mouth. It also brings with it residual and sometimes discredited concepts of human agency and cognitive transparency. While the differential design of
one apparatus versus another must modulate how each does or does not construct
User-subjects, any entity positioned as a User, however briefly or permanently, brings
with it a contextual history that is not reducible to software instructions and can twist
the terms of subject delineation for its own purposes. An apparatus’s ways of subject
making set terms of disposition and articulation, but it does not magically flatten the
history of the world into its single interface (even as much as it might want to do

256

User Layer

exactly that). It also cannot hold onto all Users for the same duration, and so we must
be equally attentive to the dissolution of subjects, in and out of User positions, as we
are to their formulation. As described in the City chapter, apparatuses and envelopes
situate the indissolubility of technical and subjective systems, drawing them together
and unwinding them in equal measure. This dynamic of making and unmaking Usersubjects is neither exhausted by discursive shifts and play, as assiduously mapped by
poststructuralism, nor excluded from them, and often it innovates on them directly.
The open entanglements of multiple apparatuses express different postures and positions, some of which can innovate cultural norms and invent new Users on the scene.
More often, however, at the global scale of The Stack, the User position is reserved for
a reductive regularization into customized utilitarianism, and when that is mobilized
for planetary-scale interfacial regimes, then its identification with the local reflections
of computational mirrors can make it alien even to its own experiences. It can do
this in at least two ways: by the “informatization” of self-identity as a project of individual care and management and in the revelation of the robust subjectivity of other
nonhuman but computationally complex Users. As we’ll see, both of these work to
first overdefine and overdetermine their subject (sometimes by bizarre constraints) and
then work to dissolve its individual boundaries through a radicalization of that same
overarticulation. For the User, from solution comes dissolution. Across the two, the
geopolitics of The Stack in no way requires the alleviation of these unsettled identifications, externalizations, and counteridentifications. On the contrary, I would argue
that anthropocenic humanism is not a natural reality into which we must awake from
the slumber of machinic alienation; rather it is itself a symptomatic structure powered
by—among other things—a gnostic mistrust of matter, narcissistic self-dramatization,
and indefensibly pre-Copernican programs for design. By loosening the grip, alternatives can be modeled, midwifed, cultivated, cared for, radicalized, soothed, executed,
extrapolated, rendered, exported, and accelerated.
59. Finding the Universal User
User is a position not only through which we see The Stack, but also through which
The Stack sees us, and so the platform sovereignties that it is most disposed to support
are those that align with how the other layers organize their own intersecting interfacial regimes. The Earth layer spins out polities of the electron and emergency, the
Cloud layer enrolls proto-citizens in global platform totalities, the City chapter maps
out spaces of filtering control and accidental alegal access, the Address layer discloses
a landscape in reserve filled with things and events available for interaction, and the
Interface layer diagrams reductive images of all of these processes, served up as total or
tactical instrumental regimes. All these are put in motion for Users, as Users are put in
motion for them. This singular-generic User pinpoints where proto-cosmopolitanisms

User Layer

257

overlap and contradict the acquisitive platforms of cognitive capitalism and its blurry
alternatives. The more salient design problem seems less to design for Users, as if they
were stable forms to be known and served, than to design and redesign the User itself in
the image of whatever program might enroll it.11 For this, any User is always a step
behind itself as it moves along its path of potential use cases, realizing some and not
others. When one virtual possible path collapses into a real interaction with a real
interfacial regime, it alters the profile and the persona, which in turn transforms the
interactions to come. The evasive distance between the predicted path and the one
taken directs the portraiture of future Users, one by one or in populations, as the repetition of irregular interactions is normalized into new models from which Stack geopolitics coheres second by second and measurement by measurement.
Wandering around the Shanghai World Expo in 2010 and into the Urbanian pavilion, I encountered this User, perhaps in its metaphysical essence (or so it seemed at the
time).12 The core pedagogy of the sensurround urban-scale propaganda for urban-scale
systems instructed that global citizenship is based on the quantitative comparability
of how much energy, water, land, and other resources a person uses and produces.
For this material cosmopolitanism, humanity is held in a planetary commons, not
merely because we share Earth’s territorial surface (as it was for Kant) but because
each of us generates a resource footprint that can be known to us and made known
to one another. Visitors learn that it is our quantitatively comparative shadows that
make us all one. Across apparent differences in appearance, culture, and lifestyle, each
User consumes energy and produces things that others consume in turn, and so Users
consume not only carbon and energy but also one another within an infrastructural
metabolism. The geopolity staged here in the Urbanian pavilion is a governing commonwealth of urbanized electrons, one demanding a material ethics of biographical
measurement and comparison. On display, literally, are several sample Users: towering
use case personas extruded in zoological exhibition as if by Charles Ray. We have big
mannequins of the Reids from Phoenix and the Hagens from Ghana, for example,
and through the pavilion’s displays, we examine cinematic and sculptural vignettes
of their daily lives, learning about what each of them does in the morning, what
they consume at night, whom they love, what they produce, how much of the urban
platform of information, energy, and carbon they use. All the while these immersive
qualitative accounts of their lives are overlaid with alphanumeric dashboards of total
consumption and production data, per User family unit. Their distant lives and situations are brought together and made comparable, if not also interchangeable, by
these standard metrics for evaluating their relative performance. Here the City (the
world, really) is posited as a mesh of semantic chemistries subordinated to their logistical administration. This isomorphic standardization of human survival—biopolitics
entwined as usual with the statistical imaginary—underwrites an autobiographical
geopolitics of the User, opening its position up to whatever it might acquire or make

258

User Layer

use of it so long as platform interactions can be traced, weighed, and optimized in
relation to a planetary resource totality.
This particular Sino-futurist cosmo-urbanity of information, energy, and architecture is as generous as it is omnivorous. Can we really expect full interoperability without some degree of cannibalism?13 The Shanghai exhibition pedagogy is ecumenical,
fair and strict, democratic and autocratic at once. But here, “we,” the persona and use
cases of the world, cohere as a polity to the extent that we are all agents of the urban
commonwealth of the digitally articulated electron, water molecule, and land use
event. The foundation of a User’s proto-citizenship falls within this Stack-scale urban
fabric, feeding into and off its provisions of life. There is a correspondence with the
platform sovereignties derived from urban envelopes, discussed in the City layer chapter, and their capacities to project unexpected User-subject positions and pathways,
but in Urbanian, we are asked to contemplate with wonder the arithmetic fairness
of closed loops and the social diversity possible within them, not lines of flight from
them. Fear and surprise, work and play are all equivalent in that they can be deduced
equally in our common shadows. As the User is drawn deeper into urban platforms,
drawing resources from them and providing cognitive and physiological value back
to them, tensions between entertainment as labor and labor as entertainment move
front and center, and the attendant paradoxes of economic privacy and civic transparency grow louder. This consolidation of City, smart grid, and Cloud produces new
aggregate technology and aggregate territory, not only by blanketing one on top of the
other but by linking them into a composite apparatus (“itself the network established
between … elements”) by enforcing a universal regime of comparative metrics.14 This
Cloud Polis model of a planetary urbanity, integrated under the sign of full-spectrum
macroeconomics of energy production and consumption, is rendered as an ethics of
autobiographical self-identity.
On this side of the Pacific, we can explore further how this ethical methodology
works to construct the political subjectivity of the User in the image of resource totality and the quantification of the feedback loops initiated with infrastructural systems.
This might entail the monetization of cognition (as for Cloud platforms) or of the calculation of a User’s carbon footprint toward other ends, but what matters most is the
optimization of the User’s profile as the source of its economic viability and its political
agency. Perhaps the bravura performance of User quantification as autobiographical
anthem was by Saul Griffith for a talk at the Poptech! conference in 2008.15 His talk
begins by recounting the procedures he underwent in order to come up with a viable
measure of the number of watts of energy that he, as one person, draws from global
platforms. Because one uses so many different systems, from airlines to highways to
processed meats, it’s necessary to calculate not just immediate interactions but the
percentage of vast wholes that one individual is arguably responsible for. It took a year,
but this is what Griffith and his partners did, quantifying every big and small systemic

User Layer

259

interaction, from food and diet to transatlantic flights to taxes paid toward the paving
of roads. He concluded that he uses around 17,027 watts per year, which not extraordinary for a US citizen. The world average, however, is 2,250 watts per person, with
several billion people filling out the long tail of energy access. Even so, Griffith’s confessional might nominate his practice of self as the ideal universal User (Homo persona?)
far more than comparatively blunt profiles available for the Reids or the Hagens in
Shanghai. Not only are his interactions with The Stack quantified with exacting candor and offered up for critique and comparison, but his intelligent efforts also provide
those systems a valuable measure of their interactions with him. He then performs a
similar heroic act of statistics for the collective User inclusive of all humans and their
aggregate effects on the planetary situation (my words, not his). His point then is to
demonstrate exactly how difficult will be the necessary transitions from current infrastructures to those required to stave off ecological calamity. At the time of his talk, the
United States had put about 90 gigatons (GT) of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere
since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution (China had put about 26 GT). Before
industrialization, the climate held about 270 parts per million carbon dioxide, and
we’ve recently passed 400 parts per million. Griffith asks how the collective User could
sustain a still very dangerous 450 parts per million and still produce the same 16 terawatts of energy currently demanded by the global population. He surmises that we’ll
have to come up with about 10 terawatts of clean renewable energy, in addition to the
6 terawatts from other sources in order to have any reasonable hope for stabilization
at 450 parts per million. Getting 10 new terawatts of clean energy in twenty-five years,
however, may mean the immediate, simultaneous, and comprehensive transformation
of almost all of our entire industrial infrastructure. We would need one 3 gigawatt
nuclear plant to go online every week for the next two decades. Plus we would need
to install 100 square meters of solar cells every second. Plus we would need twelve 3
megawatts of wind turbines every hour. Plus, to grow enough biofuel-producing algae,
we would need to fill a space the size of Wyoming. To have a chance of accomplishing
these feats, he says, Coke and Pepsi would have to switch entirely to making sheets
of reflective mirrors instead of sheets of aluminum for cans of sugar water. GM, Ford,
and Toyota would have to team up to achieve the goal of one wind turbine every five
minutes. Obviously such lurches would bring their own negative consequences, and
so even “solving for carbon” is sure to cause other problems. In other words, it seems
impossible. It is true, he concludes, that we have brought 10 terawatts online in the
last forty years, and so who knows? Without the deus ex machina of miraculous nanotechnological quantum fusion from Mars, the prospects for the comprehensive stabilization of atmospheric carbon without dramatic reduction in energy use by people like
himself seems highly unlikely. Most interesting, however, is not Griffith’s individual
apologetics but the shift from the unit of the individual User of The Stack to a profile
derived from the total sum of all Users, gauged as one enormous meta-User. Perhaps

260

User Layer

this shift in scale provides some hope that deliberate redesign of governance is possible. The political identities of Users are produced through interfacial regimes, and
the public profile and legitimacy of those regimes appear in the composite mosaic of
the Users that it generates. The whole makes parts, which make wholes: the apparatus
individuates User, and the totality of Users comes to define the scope and quality of the
apparatus as infrastructure for their lives.
60. Quantified Self and Its Mirror
Above I identified two tracks by which the User-subject is at once synthesized and made
alien to itself: the experience of the self reflected through visual-quantitative technologies and the granting of subjectivity to nonhuman agents imbued with computational
intelligence. The following sections explore both of these in greater depth. Elsewhere I
have identified what we can call the “death of the user.” By this, I mean the expiration
of a specific kind of user, and the displacement its soft humanism from the conceptual
center of design strategy by the proliferation and predominance of both nonhuman
and nonindividuated actors within the expanded field of ubiquitous computation.16
“Joe and Josephine” are no longer generic; they would now be seen, in comparison
to all possible Users, as specifically and idiosyncratically primate. As discrete human
individuals believe themselves in charge of their tools, they nevertheless represent an
increasingly particular, even marginalized type of User-agent within a diverse throng of
alternatives. At the same time, this same dispersion and diversification of User-agency
into the wider landscape of the world provokes a belligerent overdetermination and
overappearance of the individuated human as the base unit through which that world
is measured.
As we human Users reflect on our selves with images of quantified digital traces, the
richly detailed portrait reflected back convinces us of our individual coherency and efficacy. However, as this User is outpaced by nonhuman actors and multitudinous objects,
he appears to himself as another one of these things. Like the addressable haecceity
tracked through logistical space, you are a smart object held together by platforms for
deep biographical comparability. The apparent stability of the profile image reflected
back conceals the necessary fragility with which any one thing holds the position of
User-subject. That fragility is a bit like Theseus’s paradox, which questions whether an
object, having had all of its parts replaced one by one over time, remains essentially
the “same” object. You may have heard a version of this as a story using George Washington’s axe instead of Theseus’s ship: “The handle has been replaced three times and
the head twice, but it is essentially the same axe.” The new axe occupies the same
“place” as the old axe, but even so, it is not the same bunch of molecules. What we
have at hand is a double within the exact outline of what is now displaced. It is the
same for the positions of User subjectivity into which we step for a moment or more.

User Layer

261

Like the axe, the User is situated by the myriad relations that produce our worlds and
the things that we do in them. There is a “there” there, but it is plural and in motion.
In our profiles, our names, ideas, organs, identities, rights, licenses, tools, itineraries,
and genomes can each be peeled off, however provisionally and artificially, from those
that also belong to other Users and so can be made to cohere into the composite image
of one self. But not only do these always move in and out of that frame, moment by
moment, each is constantly attaching itself to other profiles and to another positions.
Sometimes one of these can even take on the position of User all by itself, leaving all the
others elsewhere. As discussed for Griffith’s movement between the scales of individual
and collective Users, the part is determined by the whole, which achieves its identity
through the coherence of its parts (even when the whole is one User and the parts his
partial component characteristics). But inside the economy of the User position, profile
components cohere into the temporary resolution, but they do so without belonging
exclusively to it.17 They travel into external places and positions, leaving behind the
afterimage of the resolved User into which so many people invest their own identities.
As suggested, this slippage is exemplified by the Quantified Self movement, an
extremely Californian subculture that seeks “self knowledge through numbers.” It
champions the use of data capture technologies to track an individual User’s “inputs”
(i.e., food and air), “states” (mood, energy level), and “performance” (mental and physical metrics). This administrative auto-objectification turns the gaze of user-centered
design research inward on itself, inflating it toward existential closure. This “care of the
self” is a fabricated hypertrophic self-interpolation, a hyperindividuated diagnostics
perfectly suited to cube farms. For the User, the reflection provides recognition and
misrecognition, not so unlike Jacques Lacan’s mirror stage parable, whereby the visual
coherency of the body reflected back is believed to confirm the psychological coherency of the self who stares at it.18 Before the primal encounter with a mirror, the temporality of inner experience was confused, unable to differentiate the mental imagery
of direct experience from memory, from a desired wish; present, past, and future are all
a jumble. On seeing the coherent image reflected back, seeing outlines following movements following outlines, the grounding of a coherent sense of self as a self-directed
subject, and as an object in the world among others, was not only possible but imperative. The visualization comes with a false guarantee but provides for more interesting
detours by those inevitable failures.
Consider, by way of example, a project that Gordon Bell developed at Microsoft
in the late 1990s, MyLifeBits, which considered the User and his individuated biography as the locus of a kind of computational infinity. The experiment draws on a
simple and ambitious question: What if everything you ever saw, heard, and felt, every
object you ever touched, every location you ever shadowed—every externally trackable experience—could be recorded at some incredible lossless resolution and fidelity,
fed into practically infinite storage, and available to recall and replay at any time?

262

User Layer

Where Turing’s artificial intelligence test attempted to detect machine intelligence by
testing its reflection in human cognition, projects like Bell’s suggest capture of the
totality of autobiographical experience by couching it within a personal universal Turing machine and so (as the research was for Microsoft) to prototype the sorts of data
management, visualization, semantic sorting, editing, and indexing interfaces necessary for the yottabyte-fluent absolute User to come? Of course, in that future, part of
what would be recorded are her sessions during which she plays back past experiences,
which would then also be available for review later on, and so on, and so on, a mirror
held up to a mirror, reflecting up into the darkness.19 The phenomenology of metadata
would be overwhelming. Certainly new vistas of self-mastery might open up for her,
but at the same time new psychopathologies would emerge in her attempts to manage the infinite regression of reflections of reflections. Leaving aside the service design
implications for Microsoft and focusing on the vertiginous depth of this kind of autocognitive technology, wouldn’t the absolute User at some point lose (or let go) the ability to differentiate present experience from past memory and from future wish? A kind
of transcendental infantilization or enlightened disindividuation? Would memories of
memory become unwound such that the consciousness of a situated subject is forever
unwound as well, leaving little piles of neurofabric throbbing in the feedback of its
own disassembly?20 If so, then can those be rewoven into different, less individuated
User-subjects, after the fact?
To define this process more formally, in the short term, an increase in the intensity, granularity, and reflexivity of information about a User’s traces in the world first
produces a cartoonishly overactualized diagram of the self as a continuous individual
unit. In the long term, the quantity of information reflected back becomes too great,
and so these same technologies undermine the boundaries of self and other, resulting in an open, incoherent, and discontiguous identity. The self burns brightest just
before falling apart; more is more, until it is actually much less, and in this case, less
may be a more fruitful accomplishment. (For this, intensity refers to the scope, scale,
and computational capacity of a diagram to capture an event or life; granularity refers
to the detail it can capture; and reflexivity refers to how much the diagram can be
meaningfully acted on, either as a GUI that controls a feedback loop or social connections providing surveillance, and a stage to show off the self-events under the social
microscope.) Where exactly the threshold point between solution and dissolution sits,
we can only hypothesize, but we can anticipate, and not without optimism, the crumbling of the psychologized single-serving human User as the generic universal User
position in relation to The Stack, and consider instead the soupy ingredients for alternatives that are left behind. Nicholas Felton is an information designer famous for his
obsessive and ironic annual reports on himself, as if he were a corporate client needing to comply with shareholder reporting requirements.21 He also was a major contributor of a redesigned Facebook timeline in 2009, which shows how Quantified Self,

User Layer

263

turning accounting techniques born of big box supply chains and reassigning them to
the surfacing of unseen patterns in our everyday lives, is not an isolated subcultural
phenomenon but increasingly central to Stack culture at large. From the Reids, the
Hagens, Saul Griffith, and Gordon Bell, and toward the mainstreaming of QS logics,
especially for social networks of Users online and offline, what will be their societal
impact more generally? Are billions of Users being convinced that their individual profile biographies are more real than they actually are, or are they being trained toward
the distributed realization of the opposite ultimate conclusion? In aggregate, will each
of us become further atomized, more grotesquely overindividuated, staring dumbly
into our own templated reflections of profiles, feeds, and complimentary feedback,
or will we become even more hive-like, drifting in the wake left by the memes of
our curated externalized cognition? The better question is: What kind of User can be
designed instead?
This hyperattenuated version of the User is claimed by myriad relations, and in stepping into its position, one is “already a crowd.”22 The overdetermined QS is analogous
to the blackened canvas, overwritten with layers and layers of figures, colors, diagrams,
and abstractions, all targeting the same referent and in so doing generating multiple means and medians. As for Theseus’s paradox, identity is tuned and retained, but
despite all attempts at resolution and actualization, it remains an open field into which
and out of which any of these layers might travel. That overdetermination does not
prohibit creativity, but it does shift its terms of operation. When the canvas is full, completely blackened with overlapping content, the act of creation doesn’t mean adding
paint, more black on black; it is instead subtraction, that is, the introduction of absence
and silence so as to make room for information now made visible by this negation—
scratching the black away to let the light in, removal as design strategy. We see this play
out with the absolute User’s slide into an abyssal dissolution of the self when confronted
with the potential totality of virtualized experiences. In response to the white noise of
his infinitely refracted subjectivity, he reflects this entropy by sliding back into perceptual incoherency (or potentially stumbling toward secular hypermaterialism). It’s
true that the real purpose of QS is not to provide all possible information at once, but
to reduce systemic complexity with summary diagrammatic accounts of one’s inputs,
states, and performance metrics. But adding more and more data sources to the mix
and providing greater multivariate fidelity also produces other pathways of dissolution.
By tracking external forces (e.g., environmental, microbial, economic) and their role
in the formation of the User-subject’s state and performance, the boundaries between
internal and external systems are perforated and blurred. Those external variables not
only act on you; in effect they are you as well, and so the profile reflecting back at the
User is both more and less than a single figure (and as we’ll see, sometimes those extrinsic forces live inside one’s own body). This is one site from which alternative User positions can be invented. It’s where the fictional resolution of the individual person as the

264

User Layer

core unit of the User position gives way toward something else, where nodes begin to
work like edges and edges like notes. The ocular appearance of the resolved first person,
first seen in the outline reflected back in the mirror and then verified in the continuity
of feedback from input, state-condition, and performance diagrams, multiplies into
a mosaic of new components clinging to other subjects, bigger and smaller than the
individual person.23
The baseline design brief for the User layer of The Stack may go something like
this: In the image of planetary-scale information infrastructure, comprising trillions
of addressable haecceities, the resolved scale of the platform need not be for one User
at a time, drifting into and out of narcissistic virtual reality, but for pluralities of partial users, quasi-users, human and nonhuman, organic and inorganic, intermingling
in intersubjective alliances, sharing perceptions, memory, algorithms and techniques,
visualization rhetorics situated among the semantic graphs of aggregate User experiences predicated not just on autobiographical interoperability, but on direct physical
and cognitive promiscuity. Imagine one sort of User logging the totality of her perceptions and interactions not as an atomic iota lost in her own manifestations (like
Bell’s MyLifeBits QS persona) but as a population of 10 billion absolute Users, all generating content and all feeding off one another’s issuances. Plural systems provide
plural images, which provide plural Users—two of us, ten of us, a hundred of us, an
entire city of us—literally seeing through each other’s eyes, remembering through one
another’s experiences, walking in one another’s shadows. Imagine Jakob von Uexküll’s
foray through the garden of Umwelten, where he encountered the interweaving but
exclusive lifeworlds of plants, animals, flowers, and insects, but in our biosemiotic
field, everything can now swap points of view. Tomorrow, may I have your yesterday?
Unexpected alliances, continental organizations, linguistic traditions, and politicotheological communions ensue, any one User moving into and out of several of them,
just as they move into and out of him. The profile reflected back is not of a resolved
individual but of empathetic assemblages across multiple spatial and rhythmic scales.
Furthermore, as nonhuman users (sensors, animals, artificial intelligence, what-haveyou) are enrolled into these collaborative perceptual-interfacial affiliations and platforms, the contingent hierarchies between physical subjects and objects are put once
again into play. So instead of the Shanghai Expo’s universal User scenario, where the
cosmopolitan apparatus of The Stack would interpolate each human as an interoperable atomic profile, however comparable and equalized they might appear, can it
instead come to provide and even demand far more alien subjectification en masse?
These would perhaps be unaccountable, even invisible to, the dynamics of individuation versus collectivization, physicalization versus virtualization, localization versus
globalization—neither solution nor dissolution, only strange columns up and down
The Stack, and from strange columns new geographies and geopolitics for a postAnthropocenic User.

User Layer

265

61. Trace and Frame
But even without such anastrophic departures from the world as we know it, the geopolitics of data-driven User subjectivization can evolve in other ways. As the User profile
shifts from one based primarily on the observation of individuated intrinsic variables
to include also the weight of the world into its measure, then as any one actor (human
or nonhuman, singular or plural) moves into and out of different assemblages, it not
only produces new territories of action, but develops meaning and strategy for its
actions in relation to the comprehensive images of territory available to it. The image
of totality that any fully formed interfacial regime provides as part of a platform is not
only the composite pattern made by crisscrossing atomic grains in flux, drifting, charging, and discharging with one another; rather, those interactions are situated within
cartographies produced not only by the traces of their instantaneous encounters accumulated over time, but also in relation to slow macrologic images of the territory as a
whole. Remember that any deep address haecceity can enter into and withdraw from
an exchange of information, appearing and disappearing over and over again, but
its specification by the Address not only makes it discrete from any instances, it also
enrolls it into a larger-scale architecture through which it contributes to new linkages
across otherwise incommunicable scales. This architecture precedes those links and is
preceded by them, just as the map precedes an itinerary through the territory that is
reduced in that map’s image but is itself produced by the accumulation of movements
through it.
For example, in Exit, a series of stunning panoramic data visualizations designed by
Diller, Scofidio Renfro, Mark Hansen, Laura Kurgen, Ben Rubin, and others as part of
the Native Land-Stop Eject exhibition curated in 2008 by Virilio and Raymond Depardon, we see this dynamic pedagogically demonstrated in the service of several information narratives about the conflicts and paradoxes of globalized space, time, population,
and value. The panoramas render the world in the image of an ongoing intercourse of
datum with datum, and ask us to identify with the individual element and the summary patterns that emerge. The former and the latter coalesce in second- and thirdorder recursive cycles, less refractions of perspective than reverberations feeding back
on themselves. Global visualizations such as these sift patterns produced by actors who
may already be piloting themselves according to more local indexes, diagrams, and
feedback loops, which in turn may also be responding directly to modulations in the
global system in which they see themselves as embedded actors. Ponder the drivers
who all refer to the same Google Maps road traffic data updates and switch freeways all
at once, effectively causing new traffic jams or even alleviating the snarl from which
they tried to escape: the regulatory equilibrium of self-mapping swarms. In one of
Exit’s panoramas about the future of transcontinental migration, “every person is represented by one pixel.” Its global visualization describes a universal system monitoring

266

User Layer

particular events, which in turn are monitoring themselves in relation to the universal
system and back again. In Exit’s visualizations, the multiplied accumulation of smallerscale assemblages—information events such as a single cash remission or cross-border
movement—cascade across the plane of the Earth composing the global scale as the
pattern space of these interlocking network flows. At the same time, the scale of the
global assemblage provides top-down structural forcings (legal, geographic, semiotic)
governing and delimiting bottom-up multiplications, and so recompose forces “back
down” to regional and atomic levels, determining in advance the kind of flows that
can and cannot be initiated and sustained by Users. In this telescoping geography, the
global and the local are neither dichotomous nor fixed scalar operations. Planetary
scales such as the “global” framed by the installation panorama should not be seen as
the closure of master abstractions, just as the local, drawn here as the individual pixel
in flight, is not only the monadic mote of autopoietic flow. Both are interlocked and
mutually embedded scales of assemblage that comprise and delimit one another (and
are by no means the only such recursive scales). While this is not, by itself, big news
for social theory, it is worth pointing out again for the context of User formation and
dissolution across intrinsic and extrinsic profiling: the part and the whole are one.
It’s perhaps easier to conceptualize this than to draw it. For example, Bruno Latour’s
recent interest in network visualization in relation to actor-network theory passes
through a reenactment of the 1903 Gabriel Tarde–Emile Durkheim debate, social monadology versus macrological abstractions (with Latour playing Tarde and speaking on
his behalf).24 He concludes that because we can now identify and track social interactions at the immediate scale that Tarde sought, and have the computational means to
model boundless instances according to as many different scalar prisms as we choose,
therefore the vocabulary of individual (as element) and society (as aggregated structure) is an unnecessarily reductive schema. For its part, working to speak as/for Virilio’s
theories, Exit does and does not succeed in reslicing the data sets so as to demonstrate
this recursion, relying in many cases on the optics of individuals caught up in global
flows within the bounded array of the Mercatur projection. We appreciate this multitude of intersecting systemic perspectives, as escaped from the single structural plane,
but want to extend beyond secondary analytical images of social interactions. As discussed in the Interfaces chapter, the images of systemic interrelationality found in GUI
and in dynamic visualizations not only diagram how platforms operate; they are the
very instruments with which a User interacts with those platforms and with other Users
in the first place. At stake for the redesign of the User is not only the subjective (QS) and
objective (Exit) reflections of her inputs, states, and performance metrics within local/
global and intrinsic/extrinsic variations, but also that the profiles of these traces are
the medium through which those interactions are realized. The recursion is not only
between scales of action; it is also between event and its mediation. Put differently, the
composition with which (and into which) the tangled positions of Users draw their

User Layer

267

own maps (the sum of the parts that busily sum themselves) is always both more and
less whole than the whole that sums their sums! This interfacial recursion—the identification and measurement of Users that already organize themselves with the very
mechanisms that are used to do the measuring—underscores that planetary data infrastructure, now general-purpose equipment, are means not only to scan a world but to
compose one as well. Data visualization is, for good or ill, more than world-mapping;
it is also world-making.
62. Maximum User
World-making is always also world-erasing, especially at the User layer, and appearance
and disappearance themselves show up and go away at strange times and in strange
ways. The case study of another exemplary maximal User draws us back into the heart
of the QS movement, and also brings us more through the solution and dissolution of
the individual User than toward a more expansive and inclusive population of Users.
That this maximal User has also been called “the patient of the future” underscores the
strange biopolitics at stake.25 I wonder, not without some perverse pleasure, what Virilio
might make of my friend and colleague Larry Smarr’s nearly decade-long interest with
the rational self-quantification and observation of data pertaining to the health of his
biological person. Originally a mathematician and astrophysicist, Smarr is the founding director of Calit2, the California Institute of Telecommunications and Information
Technology, the University of California system’s flagship IT research institute, in La
Jolla. Smarr was also the founder of the National Center for Supercomputing Applications, which among other things brought forth Mosaic, the web browser that became
Netscape.26 He is among the key pioneers in cyberinfrastrucure, scientific visualization,
and what he calls “planet scale distributed computing.” But as of late, the information
platform that has captured his most intense interest is his own body. While QS has
many ancestors, Smarr’s own quest brings to mind Buckminster Fuller’s notebooks, the
“Dymaxion File,” in which he recorded his every activity. The personality type of those
who see the design of planetary technologies as their vocation seems to suggest an
interest in modeling everyday activities as if they were astrophysics. For others in the
QS scene, their own comparatively subdued pursuit may instead have more to do an
unhealthy internalization of Office Park evaluative criteria of systems performance and
benchmarking. Smarr and I have discussed this at some length, and it’s clear to me that
his interest is much deeper and less individualistic than the psychology I have ascribed
the QS movement as a whole.
Smarr tracks his health at a finer grain level than most of us could manage, or even
likely want to. It demands forms of data mining that he is uniquely prepared for (he
diagnosed himself with adult-onset Crohn’s disease years before doctors confirmed
this). He has not only monitored and quantified his food intake for years, but has his

268

User Layer

blood drawn and analyzed according to a dizzying array of tests every few weeks. He’s
had his personal genome mapped at a resolution few others ever have, and perhaps
more interesting, he has also done the same for his microbial gut biome, the ecology of
microscopic life that inhabits us and helps keep each of us healthy. The genome of the
microbial biome inside our guts has evolved over millions of years in correspondence
with the host human species, sometimes beneficially and sometimes pathologically.
Over the course of our individual lives, our bodies provide selection pressures on how
our individual microbial biomes change and evolve inside us. What we eat, in particular, can fundamentally alter the alien ecology in our gut, for better or worse. A poor
diet can force the evolution of the biome toward an unhealthy state in which it no
longer supports our health and instead could contribute to significant malaise in the
entire biological mechanism. Smarr’s personal medicine is somewhat unusual in that
the focus is shifted from the self-regard of his own somatic body toward the curation
and gardening of this internal microbial civilization.
Inside the shell of one’s skin, there is far more DNA that is nonhuman than DNA
that is human. You, the skin bag, are all too less human than human. Even to the extent
that your individual corporeal machine is to be taken as the base unit of medical analysis and political subjectivity, it is already a multispecies arrangement. Smarr’s broader
intellectual project for the systemic establishment of digital medicine envisions the
coembodiment of information at the scale of 7 billion humans and zillions of genes,
environmentally bound molecules, proteins, and microbes, all contributing to a comprehensive diagnostic simulation and treatment metabiopolitics, a universal biocomputation intersecting with the universal ecocomputation that Griffith’s demonstration
popularizes. As a research model, it draws an explosion of traditional, individuated
patient models into pluralized platforms in which every User’s genomic, nutritional,
neuronal, microbial, and environmental data would be systematically aggregated into
an information commons where new kinds of analysis and pattern recognition could
mature. The thickened interrelations of intrinsic and extrinsic force further dissolve
the individuation of the singular patient toward alternative, as yet unnamed patterns
of biological plasticity. The tracing of pathologies across multiple biological scales, over
time and over multiple populations at such comprehensive scope and granular detail,
would surely also reform basic concepts of “disease,” from one recognizing swatches of
individuated symptoms toward one governing nuanced economies of symbiotic infection, transfer, and immunization across multiple host sites, and smart enough to see
some contamination as enabling health, not preventing it.27 In time we see projects
designing artificial intelligence systems that could interpret the exabytes of real time
and archived data and produce interpretive causal models, images of emergent patterns, that startle diagnosticians and patients alike. This hyperilluminated medicine
would surely show that causality and pathology zigzag from microbe to bioregions and
back again in utterly surprising ways, and that today’s folk conceptions of organ, body,

User Layer

269

group, and toxin demand more rational recategorizations (and Addresses), likely ones
that will appear as self-evident when revealed but that today we can scarcely anticipate.28 In parallel, the various technologies and concepts gathered under the rubric
of synthetic biology can engage this absolutized commons as an open-ended toolkit
for biological refashioning (if it is actually held in common) and in doing so bring
its own controversies and contradictions. Further, in the institutional transference of
tracking, diagnosis, and treatment expertise toward the tracing of super- and subindividual forces by computational infrastructures, and away from the one-on-one observation and interviewing of individual persons, the necessary role and proficiencies of
“doctors” would evolve as well. While the expert arts of high-touch treatment don’t
abdicate their positions, the computational support of pattern recognition and robotic
support of therapeutic abscission do alter how health is provided, just as they alter
what health is and make very different demands on those trained to do the providing.
To be sure, the biogeopolitics of all this are ambiguous, amazing, paradoxical,
dangerous, and weird. Our at-hand ideas about sovereignty, transparency, therapy,
jurisdiction, and privacy provide unreliable models for a biopolity based on the composite information that each of us physically secretes. This also makes projects like
Exit incomplete, in that they draw prematurely conclusive images of totalities now
overflowing their global frames. The pluralized User position may include melancholic
information traces bearing witness to injustice, but this cannot develop in isolation
from a far less certain politics of the stigmergic smear and stain.29 With this in mind,
it should be noted that Smarr the permanent patient, also collects his own feces and
has them expertly analyzed. This is the best way to keep tabs on the state of his gut
microbes, and through their cipher, the general state of his own health. Grandparent toilet bowl stool diviners, you were right: considering the density of DNA from
microbes, from one’s own internal fluids, and from the DNA of the remaining foodstuffs that one ate, the human stool is one of the most information-dense substances
you are likely to regularly encounter. Bit by bit, your stool is far more information rich
per cubic centimeter than the flash memory in your iPhone. Lesson: We secrete more
information than we ourselves constitute on our own. In their aggregation, are our shadows
more substantial than what casts them? If so, where, if anywhere, do we finally pin
down the stable sovereign of the User (or the individual person) as a systemic agent? For
quantitative biomedicine (not just for deconstruction), presence finally guarantees less
than the trace. Can we imagine an inversion, then, for which the sovereign interface
to the platform is tethered to the structured information simulacrum instead of to the
discrete entity from which it slips? Of course. We call this the profile, and platforms
are built on economies of their administration. However, we need to more forcefully
activate the back-and-forth between the profile and the individuated humanist subject
so that the simulation’s work as the expression of multiple geopolitical and biopolitical intersections can do more and say more. What responsibilities the entity has to the

270

User Layer

profile, the profile has to the entity, and how the User position can or should mediate
them are thankfully still open questions. Constitutional resolutions on privacy and
permission seem feeble, both intellectually and strategically, without better options for
what preferred policy actually might be. Do they hint of a bioethics in which a User/
person/profile’s refusal to submit data trails to holistic biomedical platforms, and by
this endanger the care of the larger commons each of us is inevitably both consuming
and secreting at once, would be analogous to today’s idiot stunt of refusing vaccines?
Put another way, in such radically transparent environments, when do systems and
individuals become indistinguishable, not to mention redundant? Is the design of one
indistinguishable from the governance of the other, and if so, is the accountability of
human individuals, as the subjects and users of digital regimes, really the most viable
sovereign unit to enforce?
Considered in relation to Exit, these questions might be clarified by juxtaposing
them with a remark by Gayatri Spivak, from her lecture on “planetarity,” to the effect
that “the most pernicious presupposition today is that globalization has happily happened in every aspect of our lives. Globalization can never happen to the sensory
equipment of the experiencing being except insofar as it always was implicit in its vanishing outlines [my emphasis].”30 I am perhaps more at ease with this perniciousness than
she, but I take this this to mean that globalization (only one weak guise of planetarity)
does in fact happen to the sensory equipment of the experiencing being exactly by
making the outlines of that being appear and disappear, including to itself, according
to regular rhythmic terms. Odysseys of self-quantification (such as Smarr’s) might confirm that disappearance must be preceded by an appearance of the cybernetic User-subject and of a world made through his embodied biology and disembodied profile. The
cultural resonance of big data and their participation in the formation of the User position within The Stack is defined by this oscillation between appearance and disappearance realized in finely grained logistical techniques now reassigned to make heretofore
unseen autobiographical patterns visible and actionable as interfacial compositions.
That position, filled with subjects and other effectors, is strongly optimized as a visual
object of knowledge, and so situated Users are invited to see themselves within the
stabilizing outlines of the exabyte ego. In this regard, Spivak may have it wrong. Globalization, as she defines it in the planetary career of electronic capital as ubiquitous
grid, is very much experienced at the level of sensory equipment precisely because it, at
least initially, makes appearance possible and validates subjects produced accordingly.
This validation is not just perceived; it is experienced (and for some, it is experienced
as synthetic User experience). But the inclusion of information from extrinsic (if also
corporeally internal) sources into an economy of identity has the opposite effect, and
it is exactly the vanishing of outlines that Spivak suggests is basically impossible. To the
extent that the composition of the User as a biopolitical subject also includes vectors
of data—genomic, microbial, microeconomic, metaecological—into the living diagram

User Layer

271

of interpolation, then the site of the subject is experienced as fully infused and overcome with extrinsic flows such that the coherence, stability, and confidence previously
invested in the visual fade away. The visual outline of the User perforates and liquefies because the biological apparatus itself comes to observe its own becoming from
the temporal perspectives of the inhuman forces congealing to give it form. Looking
inward from the outside, the somatic homo economicus, especially the one reflected in
the mirror of big data, burns brightest in the sharp relief of its own extinguishment.31
As ever, economic imperatives fabricate subjects, even universalizing them as transhistorical actors, only to melt them down as the raw material of another project—in this
case, one that is not limited by the self-regard of a single species.
63. Death of the User
In the disappearance, or at least displacement, of the essential human User, a multitude
crowds into and overflows the evacuated position.32 As the existential incorporation of
information into the User-subject works to consolidate and then explode its humanist register, it does so by placing the biological materiality of the human subject onto
a common plane with other actors and events. It doesn’t unwind human privilege
into formlessness; it leverages and augments its form with other, perhaps livelier posthuman (nonhuman, inhuman, ahuman) agents and subjects. Along a legal axis, this
spans from the recognition of the prospective “personhood” of other species (dolphins,
apes, rainforests, artificial intelligence, robots) to the formalization of the personhood
of corporations, complete with constitutional rights to free speech and to bear arms
beyond those of the individual people who may comprise them.33 We may see interesting combinations of these claims, for example, artificial intelligences or rainforest carbon sinks, not just as possessed by corporate persons but which are corporate persons
in their own right and enjoy the political benefits thereof.
We’ll visit some of the current denizens of this space, but first, I consider what the
appearance of these kinds of posthuman Users means for the more general understanding of User subjectivization already discussed above (including in the City chapter).
When “things” are subjects, then what are the “apparatuses” that provide platform
subjectivity to Users? Only other apparatuses and envelopes? Or do people subjectivize things and give them platform sovereignty through interaction in the same way?
Turning momentarily back to Agamben’s disposition on dispositif, he writes that “we
have then two great classes: living beings and apparatuses. And, between these two,
as a third class, subjects. I call a subject that which results from the relation and, so to
speak, from the relentless fight between living beings and apparatuses [emphasis added].
Naturally, the substances and the subjects, as in ancient metaphysics, seem to overlap,
but not completely. In this sense, for example, the same individual, the same substance,
can be the place of multiple processes of subjectification: the user of cellular phones,

272

User Layer

the web surfer, the writer of stories.”34 So while any one entity can surely step into
many different User positions depending on the demands of different apparatuses, for
Agamben the very possibility of that position arises in the interplay between organic
and inorganic bodies (and given his example, the humanist agent is the presumed
exemplar of the former). He goes on to concede (a half-nod in the direction of Gilbert
Simondon, perhaps) that while, yes, it is true that technological individuation is inseparable today from species-becoming (“apparatuses are not a mere accident in which
humans are caught by chance, but rather are rooted in the very process of ‘humanization’ that made ‘humans’ out of the animals we classify under the rubric Homo sapiens”); the sheer proliferation of such apparatuses demands, however, a different kind
of encounter between that (already-formed?) “human” and the bewildering gizmos
in his midst, asking strange and unwanted things of him. “It would probably not be
wrong to define the extreme phase of capitalist development in which we live as a
massive accumulation and proliferation of apparatuses. It is clear that ever since Homo
sapiens appeared, there have been apparatuses; but we could say that today, there is not
even a single instant in which the life of individuals is not modeled, contaminated, or
controlled by some apparatus. In what way, then, can we confront this situation, what
strategy must we follow in our everyday hand-to-hand struggle with apparatuses?”35
While he goes on to say that that the appropriate response is not one of simple refusal
or acclimation, it does not seem for him that the landscape of apparatus might make
worlds (and User-subjects) through encounters with things other than what he would
qualify as (human) “living beings.” In fact, for Agamben, our engagement with apparatuses seems to work in the opposite direction: “We must also immediately consider the
apparatuses that crowd the Open with instruments, objects, gadgets, odds and ends,
and various technologies. Through these apparatuses, man attempts to nullify the animalistic behaviors that are now separated from him and to enjoy the Open as such, to
enjoy being insofar as it is being. At the root of each apparatus lies an all-too-human
desire for happiness. The capture and subjectification of this desire in a separate sphere
constitutes the specific power of the apparatus.”36 Not only do animals and machines
have no place inside this User position, they are, he observes, foremost subservient
apparatuses through which humans inject, invest, and sublimate their own desires for
reconnection (through disconnection). It would seem that by this doctrine, a more
active subjectivity for machines and animals is, if not impossible, then at least archaeologically or politically perverse. Things (and other humans) are what make humans
into subjects; humans don’t give subjectivity to things, nor do things do this for other
things. The “third class” of subjects between “living beings” and “apparatuses” is his
diagnosis, now a unidirectional accomplishment.
Everyday examples suggest that this provides an inadequate explanation of the apparatus and platform sovereignties, and an empirically suspect description of how the
contemporary career of the User-subject is formulated in apparatus economies. Clearly

User Layer

273

sometimes apparatuses (e.g., machines, systems, animals) are the User-subject of and
for other machines, systems, and animals without the immediate human involvement
and interference, though human-directed invention may set the stage for these interactions. Sometimes these Users are living, nonhuman beings with rather different desires
regarding the recapture of some lost animality (in that they are already on the other
side of the human-animal political divide, as articulated by Agamben in The Open).37
Perhaps as living systems, their valence and variance is encapsulated by the consistent
encounter with a particular apparatus, such as a rainforest whose “inputs, states, and
performance” are sampled as a continuous calculus by ambient sensor arrays. Sometimes they are not living at all in any conventional sense. Machines possessing varying
innate capacities or artificially imbued intelligences can work from the position of the
User with Stack systems at every layer and are addressed by those layers in ways that
are functionally agnostic as to whether such agents are motivated by human desires
or not. It is still important to recognize that any one machine, just like any human,
can be subjectivized by different external systems in different ways, and so can take on
different effective profiles, just as a person does. The available range of User positions
that a machine can inhabit is as diverse as the demands and interfaces that are made
available to it. Its possible performances are also as diverse as those of any other User
that derives its platform sovereignty by interacting with the surrounding apparatus
and envelopes. We anticipated this decentering of human perspective in describing
the potential plurality of deep address haecceities, invoking potential Users across an
abyssal spectrum of scalar abstraction and physicalization. Of more immediate concern
for the User layer of The Stack, however, is to understand the multidirectional and
mutual capture of being (living or not), apparatus, and subjectivization. Giving them
more depth, Agamben’s formulation echoes theories of machinic prostheticization, so
important during the McLuhan era, whereby “Man” pilots various tools and technologies through which he extends himself and becomes reembodied by those media.38
The high-tech Vitruvian Man, radiating waves of “desire” and “needs” out through
the successive concentric relays of television, architecture, automobiles, and robotics,
is like Earth within Ptolemaic astronomy, always sited at the center of his technical
cosmos and believing his own perspective view rather too much. Economies of prostheticization are in fact important to understanding the posthuman User position, but
their shape is not that of a one-way concentric radiation, from human into apparatus.
It is, rather, a crisscrossing field in which humans themselves are just as likely to be
the prostheses, and the apparatus is just as likely to be the User that prostheticizes the
human, as the other way around.
If, as this book argues, technologies can be defined by the quality of accidents that
they produce, at least as much as, if not more so than, by the uses for which they were
intended, then for The Stack, we can include the universal—once again human and
nonhuman, living and nonliving—User-subject among these. Foregrounding the fact

274

User Layer

that this subject need not be human in order for it to constitute a relationship with
other agents and apparatus suggests some conclusions and projects for the User layer.
The first might suggest that the User is an obnoxious subject, derived from the simpleminded and self-affirming utilitarianism of consumer cybernetics and defended mostly
to make humans easier to locate and monetize as end points in systemic relays. In this
light, putting nonhumans into that User position should be seen as a temporary station
at best, but perhaps a means to invent different kinds of agencies, not just mimicking
this degraded human. We must save the nonhumans from being merely humans, so
that they could show us a different way for us to be both human and not. Another
project might steal from the surfacing of posthuman actors through the medium of the
universal User, that these simple utilitarianisms cannot hold and that the psychological-utilitarian User is thereby recast in a far less reductive and less familiar light. In its
place we imagine a re-wilded landscape of inhumanist intentions, mapped by multipolar points of control, composing a more polysynchronic and less chauvinistic system
of systems. It is probably prudent to acknowledge the first conclusion and design on
behalf of that second project. In doing so, we should pay special attention to the risks
incurred by legacy User positions, including the tendency to individuate the subjective
outcomes of interactions with The Stack’s apparatuses and envelopes. With these caveats at hand, we examine the work of nonhuman User in three exemplary guises: animal
User, artificial intelligence (AI) User, and machine User.
64. Animal User
For McLuhanite prostheticization, we invest and amplify agency by projecting it away
from ourselves and into specific parts of the world, such that our embodiment might
be augmented by the capacities of those objects (a hammer’s solidity) just as that
object is augmented by our soulful agency (the hammer knows what to hit). In this
cooperation, the world folds into the extended will and wisdom of the human body,
but today, the reverse of this fold is perhaps a more critical process for exploration. The
biological informationalism of the universal and absolute User also turns the animalhuman body into another kind of matter, leading to a decentering disenchantment
of its agency. Instead we watch the world fold into the body, now itself a prosthetic
extension of that world, correlated and piloted by it. In this reverse prostheticization,
the human figure is set in motion from some other position in the field; the subject becomes object, self becomes substance, body becomes metabolic reserve, food
machines consume you. Even for such multipolar mutual extension, the influence and
self-identity of human subjects are by no means excluded (just look around you), but
it is made conditional by multidirectional chains of association and by the recognition of previously inert media as potential colleague Users. In particular, animals are

User Layer

275

one key metabolic reserve that have been essential, if not always willing, enablers of
human evolution. Proteins in their flesh were consumed for ours, their skins became
our clothes and allowed migration to new places that we explored while riding on their
backs on our way. The terms of this relationship already seem ugly. As the unfolding
disenchantments brought by genetics, neuroscience, and evolutionary biology continue to undermine the human/animal distinction (according to Agamben, critical to
the historical provision of political sovereignty onto the former), the contested space
of animalian identification has been the site where posthumanism is being actively
articulated for the humanities.39
To map that multipolar field, an idea of inverse prostheticization is necessary to
pinpoint symmetrical reversals of the human/animal distinction, where the human
is now ridden and no longer the rider. The physiognomic, communicative, and emotional continuities and discontinuities between species are restaged by mutual identification and invention, exemplified by robotics laboratories that draw from animalian
anatomies to solve for locomotion and adaptation: robot dogs, robot fish, robot birds,
robot insects, and so on. For human purposes, the graduation from biological to
synthetic animal machines is not difficult to understand—there is no design without some biomimesis—but what those animals might make of their robotic cousins
is another matter. Surely perhaps some of the attraction and wariness that humans
feel for humanoid robots might be played out for them as well, including fascination,
indifference, and hostility. But instead of transposing animal machines into robots,
how might animals use robots? What does it mean to install an animal body into the
User position of a complex robot, especially an animal with whom anthropomorphic
identification is all but impossible? Back in 2004, Garnet Hertz designed a table-sized
mobile robot, navigable through a rollerball interface, and introduced a Madagascar
hissing cockroach into the pilot’s nest.40 When cooperative, the cockroach did what
cockroaches do and scurried about on the rollerball, which in turn caused the entire
robot to scurry around the room like a giant cyborg cockroach, because that is exactly
what it was. The effect was startling and uncanny, and it had everything to do with the
degraded station of the cockroach. The creature occupies some liminal space between
animal and matter, living dirt, filth that is but should not be in motion. If dirt is “matter out of place,” watching the living dirt in the driver’s seat of complex technology is
upsetting, a sensation that runs up and down the spine of autonomic prejudice.41 This
is so, first because the unequivocal User in this demonstration is a bug, that all-purpose
figure of primordial mindlessness and repetitious swarming aggregation, and second,
because the robot prosthesis amplifies the scale of the bug’s “intentions,” transforming
it into a grotesquely outsized coparticipant in our immediate habitat. The observer is
forced to identify with the cockroach as a fellow User and to do so despite the absolute
minimum of Cartesian credentials that it may possess. Cybernetics, of course, refers

276

User Layer

to the piloting of systems, and Garnet’s roaches, now learning to fly, present a precise example of subjectivization through the apparatus because of, not despite, their
dubiousness.
But the shifting of relations between humans and animals, mutually co-constituted by shared interfaces, needn’t be limited to placing animals in isolated control
over more and more complex prosthetic technologies, letting them find their own
purposes in The Stack, as wonderful as that design brief surely is. The positioning of
human and animal as co-Users of interfacial platforms also demonstrates the scope of
communication and identification that is possible when both occupy symmetrical
locations within the platform. OOZ is a series of projects led by Natalie Jeremijenko,
that seeks to expand from the restrictive and hierarchical forms of human/animal
encounter available in zoos, where animals are trapped in place for observation but
really where communication between species is at best serendipitous and at worst systematically suppressed. The project description explains that “unlike the traditional
zoo [OOZ] is a place where the animals remain by choice, a zoo without cages. Like
a traditional zoo, it is a series of sites where animals and humans interact. However,
the interactions at an OOZ site differ from that of a zoo. OOZ is interactive in that it
provides human a set of actions, the animals provide reactions and these couplets add
up to a collective pool of observations and encounters. The human/animal interface
has two components: (1) an architecture of reciprocity, i.e. any action you can direct
at the animal, they can direct at you and (2) an information architecture of collective
observation and interpretation.” The basic proposition is then extended in several
instantiations featuring variously robotic geese, human-goose language translation
media, bird art, amazing birdhouses, amphibious architecture, restaurants for fish and
humans to share a common meal, stages for human/bat encounter in dense urban
settings, and so on. The project employs of a kind of expanded interaction design,
and its built-in structuring of the User position, as a way to leverage a rotation in pervasive and unnecessary asymmetries between human and animal actors in general:
animals are no longer prosthetic channels and metabolic reserves but collaborative
co-Users. This is not only for the benefit of the animals but also as a way to allow
curious humans an introduction to the fascinating lifeworlds of our neighbors and
to experience more satisfying sorts of communication with them. Critical to this is
the design of reciprocal interfaces in which both sides of the interfacial membrane
have equally impactful (if not always identical) means to affect the other. Here, that
multipolar field for which the User subject position can be inhabited by a plurality of
individual and aggregated agents draws not on the prosthetic radiation of control, in
either direction, but rather on leveling the species-agnostic User position toward the
open invention of alternative common interfaces.42 The impetus for Agamben’s plea
that the essential accomplishment of the subjectivizing apparatuses is to “nullify animalistic behaviors” is also put to rest.

User Layer

277

65. AI User
It may be that the deprioritization of the human User-subject within The Stack as a
whole is made that much less frightening by interfaces designed to invite anthropomorphic empathy and identification. As of this writing, Siri for iOS is one iconic version of this new form of interface. Its significance is not only that it is voice-activated
instead of mouse-click controlled, or that it responds to User inputs in synthetic spoken
language, but that it is designed as a nascent form of an artificial human personality. We are invited not only to interact with iOS, and through the operating system
with the semantic web (or at least the parts of the web that Siri knows how to search
and process), but also to interact with Siri herself. The development of the User is also
driven by the ability of artificial intelligences, simple ones and complex ones, to enter
the User position and engage The Stack directly. They do this on the direct behalf of
a human User, and they do this with or without human supervision, such that the
human is in a way Siri’s co-User as much as the other way around.43 So then, who is Siri
and who (or what) would the wider population of similarly personified interfaces/bot
agents become? As the base model of the ideal assistant, her personality is specifically
defined in relation to what the range of options might be, but her supposed neutrality as a universal assistant is highly contestable. She is one individuated person, not
a plurality or multitude or composite. She is by default setting female in gender. She
possesses a kind of patient and understated omniscience. Though a bit hard of hearing,
she is extraordinarily reliable, and by the same turn, she is reliably subordinate. When
asked strange things, she may demonstrate a dry sense of humor. She is also invisible,
possessing no face, like Charlie on Charlie’s Angels. She is always there, but also apparently spending her time elsewhere when not actually here. All of these specific qualities
need not define the personified agent as they do.
In 2012 (before Spike Jonze’s film Her), a group of my undergraduate students who
wished to explore other alternatives began developing Siri-like assistant apps based on
alternative, often fractured personalities. Departing from the supposed neutrality of
Siri, these artificial borderline cases would engage in less generic sorts of User-Stack relationships, not all of them healthy or immediately recognizable. Some of their assistants
were moody and unreliable. They may give answers based on their jealous analysis of
your recent wall posts and try to trick you into paranoid suspicions about your friends.
In time, similar alternative personality assistant Apps may demand absolute fidelity
and suffer virtual death when it is revoked, like a passive-aggressive Tomagotchi. At
this same time, it may merge with other Apps to perform spontaneous amazing feats on
your behalf. Their interest went beyond persuasive interaction design gone sideways
and was based more on what kinds of complex cognition and interaction are sanitized
out of synthetic User agency and how weaving those wooly leftovers back in could
point in more interesting directions. The results differed from Siri in two key ways.

278

User Layer

The suite of assistants they designed were not meant for one imaginary User for whom
Siri’s personality is “universally” appropriate. Instead they developed idiosyncratic and
culturally specific agent personalities. Their menagerie included agents for specific ethnic experiences, familial niches, curatorial perspectives, and User predicaments. Each
would be finely tuned to a certain User but irrelevant to most others. Second, the agents
were in different ways unreliable. Their personalities were defined by contradictions
and mixed motives, much like human personalities. They may be manipulative or
insecure, prejudiced or forgetful. The design issue here is not that broken tools are better, but that in designing interfaces that resemble a familiar mind, it may well be that
vulnerable and limited artificial personalities invite and support deeper identification
and loyalty from human Users than generic and predictable ones .44 The fifth edition of
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders may prove essential reading for programmers of the next decades full of Siris.45 If Siri is just the tip of a AI interface iceberg,
then to presume that “she” should be so defined by C-suite master-slave small talk is
already to presume too much. The full spectrum of weirdness, based on actors passing
information into and out of one another, is a richly reticulated space, and approaching
it as such makes those clichéd relationships moot. We need to ensure that AI agents
quickly evolve beyond the current status of sycophantic insects, because seeing and
handling the world through that menial lens makes us, in turn, even more senseless.
Something else needs to sideline the vestigial, embarrassing anthropocentrism that
brings the false flattery of passive (or passive-aggressive) assistants. In fact, the stage
management of the human User as somehow commanding the work of the App is
already, we may conclude, an unnecessary alibi protecting the essential opposite effect
(that the mammal User is only a provisional mechanism for dragging gigaflop tracking
devices through the avenues of cities and for remonetizing these routes as the spatial
career of algorithmic capital and its successors).
Put differently, bots are Users already, and we are already well past the point in
which more than 50 percent of Internet traffic is generated by nonhuman users.46 As far
as The Stack may see it, humans are a privileged User, but a shrinking minority, even as
the next billions of them come online over the next decade. Similarly, the role for HFT
algorithms is indeterminable, even though they do not speak at us they do speak for
us, and we can assume that if similar forms of weaponized mathematics become more
normative, then the plural and partial nature of any individuated human User subject
interest and position may be that much harder to keep straight. In the ongoing technologicization of intelligence, we see cute slippages of position between humans and
machines. For example, the original mechanical turk in the eighteenth century was a
chess-playing machine, apparently an automaton exhibiting human intelligence, but
in fact operated from afar by a human User. Today Amazon Mechanical Turk restages
this arrangement, not just for chess but for any menial task the User can devise. Behind
the browser are at least half a million “workers” who complete piecemeal tasks for

User Layer

279

micropayment.47 We see not AIs appearing as if they were human, but humans appearing as if they were AIs. As it’s been since Karel apek’s “universal robots” introduced
on the stage in 1921, the robot not only mimics the human, but provides a portrait
of the human as an object viewable to itself from the outside, and with the human
negotiates an ongoing dance of reciprocal idealization. And in itself, this may signal
less a mechanistic subsumption than a wider berth for incentive mutual identification
between co-Users.
66. Machine User
The machine User comes in many different guises and in a variety that is difficult to
summarize and characterize. It can refer to almost any kind of automation or machinic
process, if drawn broadly enough, or to very specific instances in which an apparatus is
designed to operate in exact relation to other apparatuses, as if it were something like
Agamben’s “living being,” which becomes a User subject through this delicate interpolation. For the latter, robotics will play an increasingly important role, and not just
as a subgenre of biomimicry. Their expanded field would be populated by subjects
and objects, of varying degrees of anthropomorphism, that animate the User layer of
The Stack by internalizing flows from the other layers and sending them back down
in columns of intentional action. These include machine Users, individuated as discrete addressable entities within interfacial regimes and more diffuse aggregate Users
interwoven into background infrastructure, and various combinations of both. Some
may be tightly bound to remote human control, such as the da Vinci robotic surgery
system, and others may be programmed to operate and locomote with relative autonomy, such as sensor arrays or mobile surveillance robots.48 The most complex of these
blend in such a way so as to displace what has been a well-established form of humanmachine-infrastructure interaction, one so well established that cities are designed to
accommodate it. That blend inserts networked machinic control at different points,
including computational augmentation of human agency over the system, or over
the machine in which the User is installed, and of the infrastructural landscape in
which those machines swarm together. Among these scenarios, the integrated design
of driverless car navigation interfaces, computationally intensive and environmentally
aware groups of cars and street systems that can stage the network effects of hundreds
of thousands such speeding robots at once, would have a dramatic impact on everyday urbanism. The “automobile” is a mobile Cloud apparatus inside of which Users
navigate the City layer according to augmented scenery, interfacial overlays mapping
addressable haecceities of interest, and suckling chemical energies from, one hopes, a
sustainable and equitable grid. Inside the fast box, the world doesn’t only pass by as
interstitial nonplaces between departure and investigation; the kinesthetic momentum of a world passing becomes homelike, the default state against which stationary

280

User Layer

location is measured. The human User-passenger, drifting through an architecture of
displacement and suspended proprioception, is symbiotically reliant on the apparatus,
itself a machinic User of the wider infrastructural systems around them to provide not
just transportation but an artificial somatosensorium.
This massive mutual prostheticization (a form of nested parasitism, even) takes time
to arrive, and the mediatization of the automotive experience did not arrive recently.
Many years ago, I jotted down these notes while stuck in a particularly slow traffic jam:
Sitting in traffic on a Los Angeles freeway, I am reminded of Joan Didion’s revelation that this
trap is the most authentic Angeleno social experience. We are not going to any place, all lined up
behind our windshields, we are all already there.49 Today, bumper to bumper, we are now all also
talking to ourselves, taking meetings, texting, emailing, Googling, checking on this and that, editing essays on our phones. This is the home and office. We do not always need to arrive, because
we are already there: if this was your home, you would live here by now. …The freeways as boulevards of “fast parking” are a grid that segments and enables an inertial sort of mobility. Ensconced
in our furtive provisional networks, the car is no longer the primary technology of mobility, even
in LA. The car has gone the way of the building: too slow. … By the time Reyner Banham arrived,
the car had eaten LA, but now the smartphone is eating the car.50 The “‘mobile” first appeared in
1970’s as a “car phone” but now the terms are reversed. In The Transformers movie, the alien robot
became a car and the phone became a robot. Here now, the car becomes a phone (as the car, in
turn, becomes a robot). … As the economy of mobility slides from mechanical to informational
the car is augmented by hands-free telephony, Bluetooth networks, in-dash GPS navigation systems offering visualised or spoken directions, audio jacks, big screens counting down the drops
of fuel while talking to you in weird accents, and emergency concierge communications by builtin satellite intercom. The handset does all this too, steering us in different directions by maps,
recommendations, search results, tags and so forth. The phone and car find ways to subcontract
each other’s functions, one to the other and back again. … In ways that would have made no
sense in Banham’s Los Angeles, the car’s interfaciality is an important criterion of performance
as a personal vehicle. The most visible change to the car in recent years is in the display electronics within its primary interface, the dashboard/cockpit. If the grille on the outside used to be the
car’s face—its look—now the face comes with the voice and is seen (worn?) now from the inside,
in the driver’s seat. That most brandable experience is not the profile of the car seen passing
through the world, but rather how the world looks gazing out through the lens of the car. … The
car phone hybrid is a mass medium, a mobile cinema micro-urbanism for one driver/user, a
habitat organised and narrated by data networks. But in the end, they are not equal; the handset
is the ascendant vehicle, and the car is the architecture in slow disappearance.51

In conceptualizing how Stack transportation might evolve, it’s tempting to suppose
that the aggregation of systems into central platforms at the Cloud level would be replicated at the City layer such that atomized vehicles (such as cars) would be agglomerated into larger urban, regional, and continental megavehicles (such as high-speed
rail). The economies of scale that are possible by regularizing and extending itineraries
might parallel those of regularizing and monetizing other kinds of social interaction

User Layer

281

online. Elon Musk’s perhaps real and perhaps speculative Hypertube project, which
would send humans whooshing up and down California inside what is essentially a
giant pneumatic tube, is exemplary, as is the tendency for cities to strategize economic
growth through the enhancement of their airports (now “aerotropoli”) ensuring their
inhabitants easy access to the rest of the global urban grid.52 Implementing such systems is obviously very expensive in both time and treasure. In addition, these existing
car-based systems would also be consumed by The Stack and transformed into Cloudbased platforms that could provide many of the same advantages, and more besides,
least in theory. Currently several at-least-partially autonomous unmanned ground
vehicles are in regular operation; driverless mining trucks, for example, move millions
of tons of dirt without a human behind the wheel, and driverless tractors plow fields
controlled remotely by V2V (vehicle-to-vehicle) networks.53 Within cities, the implementation of automotive automation has proven more difficult, as evidenced by the
retreat from initial designs for personal rapid transit transport in Masdar City, Abu
Dhabi (as well as the ill-fated Aramis project in Paris, as chronicled by Bruno Latour—
planned and re-planned, but never built).54 The best-known autonomous car project, as
yet to launch services commercially, is of course that spearheaded by Google. It is not
so uncommon to see Google’s prototype vehicles, decked out with telltale gear on the
hood, pacing along particular streets in California. Much of the earlier work at Google
on these technologies was done by Sebastian Thrun, who famously announced that
a full-scale automobile automation system would save “one million human lives per
year” by preventing accidents.55 As said, Google’s interest in mass transportation goes
back further (at least Page’s Ann Arbor monorail.)56 It seems quite natural that someone
with an interest in the engineering of global platforms would either begin or end up
with transportation, but whether one sees the Internet as a “superhighway” or the hundreds of millions of cars in motion at any one time as very large “data packets” makes
all the difference in how the issue is problematized and formulated. 57
Just as your mobile is not really so much a “phone” anymore (it too is a machine
User), the Google mobile apparatus should be understood less as a car than, as said,
as a car-shaped end device within a larger Cloud platform. It is a robotic device that a
person gets inside and which carries her around. From the perspective of The Stack,
it is also a composite User, built of augmented human perception as well as the individuated profiles of the human “passengers,” the manifold addressable systems of the
rolling device, as well as its changing inputs, states, and performances as it travels
around from site to site. The same human profile may enter and exit this shell, just as
the car device may incorporate many different human User profiles in the course of the
day. But when in motion and hurtling next to other cars, the encapsulated actor may
temporarily be seen as one User, for whom the whole system must optimize a uniquely
ideal path. The real impact of autonomous vehicular Cloud devices does not appear
until their movements can be coordinated not User-by-User but as components in a

282

User Layer

streaming swarm.58 In theory, when synchronized by shared situational awareness and
communication, whole herds of them may speed within inches of one another without
worry of imminent collision. Should one brake suddenly a mile ahead, those behind
would brake instantaneously instead of hurtling into the cascading pile-up. Cars going
long distances could be clustered into long trains and fast-tracked away from local traffic. In this, many of the goals of PRT (personal rapid transit) systems (such as Aramis)
might be realized by upgrading existing systems in this way. The systemic integration
of vehicles would also have an impact on the economics of ownership, financing, and
insurance that make car ownership more onerous today by shifting driving toward
service-based platforms. Users may subscribe to a fleet of driverless cars available to
them at a moment’s notice, and so can forgo the sunk costs of purchasing a machine
they might use only a few minutes a day. For carbon-intensive products such as cars,
a very large-scale shift toward using but not owning would at once save resources and
offer greater end User convenience, not to mention the benefit to urban planners no
longer having to waste valuable land on parking lots to store cars that will sit idle.59
The mass medium of swirling textures of robotic computational exoskeletons would
also suggest innovations in the phenotypical outer surfaces of the devices themselves.
They can in principle touch, connect, and intersect with one another, switching from
singular to plural according to circumstances, and so the rather rigid shell and chassis
form we know today could give way to other flexible morphologies. At the very least,
as we are shuttled here and there in the vast multitudes of such machines, how human
Users are physically positioned and what we spend our time doing will certainly not
be the same as it is now.60 As discussed in the Interfaces chapter, as the “car” becomes
a Cloud platform, it becomes available to an Apps economy, and to the extent that the
Google Car is just a very large Android device with a very large, next generation Google
Glass display, there is much for designers to work with.
At the same time, such a system would bring potential problems of the same order
of magnitude as those it alleviates. The software and sovereignty questions don’t abide
easy answers. First, the legal identity of this composite User is not immediately clear.
Several states have already passed legislation indicating that autonomous vehicles are
legal to operate on their roads, thereby establishing the baseline that such machines are
at least not criminal. But considering the quantity, complexity, and sensitivity of the
data generated by such technologies, all working in concert, as well as the expertise and
infrastructure necessary to conduct the rhythms of the swarm safely and effectively,
it’s not likely that any Department of Motor Vehicles is a likely candidate to govern a
network of pilotless vehicles. Who is, then? Is the working presumption that over time,
drivers will subscribe to personal mobility platforms that operate with sufficient autonomy from the agencies ill equipped to monitor anything of this sort? When would
such a platform, linking cities and vehicles into one metamachine, require clearance
from every single state legislature for intercontinental cargo traffic to flow? Surely the

User Layer

283

National Security Agency has something to say about all that geolocative data. In short,
the roads themselves may be where some of the most contentious and important friction between emergent Cloud Polis and the state over the geography of jurisdiction will
play out. As discussed in the Cloud chapter, the interweaving of multiple and incongruous sovereign claims often hinges on how emergent platforms problematize and repurpose existing platforms (such as the intercontinental highway network and its federal
stewards), and by how existing platforms steer that emergence toward its own publics.
Moreover, the psychological anguish of relinquishing driver status would likely
ensure whatever policies are initially put in place may be irrational and absurd. Today
the populist backlash against smart meters installed in residences as end points of more
efficiently managed energy networks is nothing compared to the resistance (both legitimate and delusional) that will meet the sunsetting of human-driven automobiles. In
important ways, however, the moral high ground may be with the robots. Gary Marcus
writes, “Eventually (though not yet) automated vehicles will be able to drive better,
and more safely than you can; no drinking, no distraction, better reflexes, and better
awareness (via networking) of other vehicles. Within two or three decades the difference between automated driving and human driving will be so great you may not be
legally allowed to drive your own car, and even if you are allowed, it would be immoral
of you to drive, because the risk of you hurting yourself or another person will be far
greater than if you allowed a machine to do the work.”61 Be that as it may, and despite
the systemic benefits to humans, there will be teeth-gnashing animosity to the call
for humans to abdicate so much of the User position to the apparatus. It’s not quite
a Copernican trauma, but it will be taken as an insult. In relation to infrastructural
systems, the position of the User is one of at least partial or provisional sovereignty
(per the discussion in the City chapter of what informal territories, physical and virtual
envelopes, provide to Users in motion across state geographies). The interweaving of
human and nonhuman bodies and User subjectivities is a radical extension and amplification of practical sovereignties (i.e., extending the freedom to move and ensuring
against accidental death). For many, however, it will be seen instead as an unholy and
inacceptable relinquishing and diminishing of self.
That said, there is no doubt that a technological assemblage such as this, drawing
on all layers of The Stack at once, perched on uncertain and ineffectual regulatory
concepts and methods, installed unevenly through often dysfunctional urban fabrics,
carrying our very persons in its clutches (and so on), will also innovate massive new
genres of catastrophe (though with over a million people killed in cars every year, those
catastrophes will have to pass a high bar to be worse than those they’ve displaced).
They mirror the vulnerabilities of The Stack as a whole, vulnerabilities of centralization
and standardization, of universalization and interconnectedness, of energy breaches
and code failures. A recent demonstration showed just how easy (fun and scary) it is to
commandeer today’s cars by hacking their electronic control units: turning off brakes,

284

User Layer

indicating a full tank when empty, indicating the wrong vehicle speed, initiating the
self-parking system while driving at 60 mph, sounding the horn randomly.62 The implications for what might be possible when similar Fluxus mayhem is orchestrated at the
scale of an entire City boggles the mind. As Marcus puts it, “These driverless cars will
be safer, but when accidents do happen, they may be on the scale of airline disasters”
though he may be off by an order of magnitude or two, depending on how deep and
pervasive the Cloud vehicle platform does or does not become.
67. From User-Centered Design to the Design of the User
These three models for the design of posthuman User—the animal User, as exemplified by the design of reciprocal interfaces between species; the AI User, by the design
of idiosyncratic companion personalities; and the machine User, by the infrastructural
driverless car platform—in no way exhaust the range of problems and opportunities,
but they are instructive in several important ways. First, their dynamics aren’t contained at the User level into a single subject position. Beyond the User and City circuit,
they draw all layers of The Stack into volatile but particular configurations, such that
a design intervention at any other layer (Address, Interface, Cloud, or Earth) could determine the character of the whole, and in turn configure the User’s position differently.
Second, they don’t simply replace humans with nonhuman actors, but incorporate
diverse living and nonliving agents into nonexclusive assemblages, from which any
of them can come and go and still retain their unique profile. As design problematics, the models in different ways also demonstrate a principle of the platform within a
platform. That is, for each scenario, The Stack metaplatform provides interoperability
through the central coordination of information produced and consumed by autonomous, if also regularized, Users at the far edges of its networks. But the incorporation of
many different types of actors (human, machinic, bots, animals, infrastructures) into
recombinant User assemblages, all with differing regular morphologies and temporalities, means that inside the User position itself, rather different kinds of platform logics
between individuated actors can occur. That is, not only is the User served (and does
it serve) the platform logic of The Stack, but the possible form and affective content
of the User position is itself engaged by different intelligent actors negotiating among
one another. That empty shell of the User position is itself a microplatform within the
macroplatform of The Stack. Finally, as the future governmental complexities of a continental-scale autonomous Cloud vehicle system in full bloom make clear, the surfacing
of nonhuman Users can’t simply inherit legacy sovereign positions available to humans,
like citizen or legal individual or driver or “person.” They don’t fit, and the Cloud Polis
we will constitute with them will have to include other durable, enforceable political positions for human and posthuman Users alike. The development of these new
sovereign formats necessitated by the revelation of nonhumans in User positions, may

User Layer

285

be the most effective driver for retooling how the territorial visions of nonstate Cloud
platforms and state Cloud platforms intersect and collide. In short, as more and more
unlike figures come to occupy the User position, smashing up against one another and
plugging into one another, they contort that position into different shapes, sizes, and
durations. As such, design cannot possibly continue to refer to “user-centered design”
without a radical complication of each of these terms (or risk reactionary failure), and
so as new actors crowd that position, the longer-term geopolitical design problem is the
design of the User itself—its limits, vulnerabilities, velocities.
Cockroaches, Siri, and driverless cars, taken together, make a strange confederation,
but from the perspective of The Stack, no stranger than the Reids, the Hagans, Larry
Smarr, or you or me. At the same time, this agnostic flatness of the User subject does
little by itself to adjudicate what the “best” “sovereign” position for any of these Users
might be. While we are optimistic that posthuman Users contribute in some way toward
a post-Anthropocenic geopolitics, that does not mean necessarily that visualizing Siri’s
carbon footprint or mapping the microbial biome in the cockroaches that pilot Google
cars is the shining path. To date, much of the discussion about the political “rights”
of the User have conflated the “property rights” (and privacy rights) of a computer’s
owner with the interests of a User who may or may not own his or her apparatuses.
The scope of rights that the individual owner to protect his machine and information
from surveillance, malware, DRM, and spyware, for example, has animated discourses
around data freedom, cyberlaw, and the electronic frontier for decades now, and as the
NSA revelations show the disturbing depths of how far these policies (if that is even
always the right word) have skewed. For as much as is at stake in these controversies,
the focus on individual privacy and autonomy from systems does not help frame how
Users that do not own the computational systems with which they interface (which is
to say almost the entirety of The Stack itself) can assert their interests. Cory Doctorow’s
“The Coming Civil War over General-Purpose Computing,” draws several dark scenarios for what happens to human Users who may be renting (financing) biomedical
robotic components (e.g., artificial eyes or legs, cochlear implants) and for whatever
reason are not able keep up with the financial terms of this particular “use/not own”
service economy. It cannot be acceptable for a biomedical Cloud service provider to
suspend service on the smart medical components that the provider owns, leaving the
User blind or immobile or deaf. Surely the User that merely uses and not owns should
be able to assert individual interests against the harm brought by property rights to
determine what an apparatus may or may not do.
For The Stack, this issue is crucial. As discussed in the Address chapter, as computation becomes a general property of all apparatuses, from the implantable to the infrastructural, then over the course of the day, a human actor may be the User of thousands
and thousands of different “computers” at various scales and in various collaborative
combinations with other actors, human and otherwise. A program by which that User

286

User Layer

position is always subservient to the sovereignty of property claims made by the owner
of the apparatus itself, whether on behalf of state publics, corporate Cloud platforms,
or distant individuals cannot possibly scale. While there may be versions of The Stack
megastructure that could withstand and even enforce that kind of totalitarian monologic, to do so would likely go against the catalytic platform logic for which end Users
in the network regularize autonomy so as to introduce information, modify it, and
reprogram the whole according to local and instantaneous needs. Clearly the better
design strategy is instead to imbue the User who is not the property owner (and who
may never own property such as a robot or an animal or a rainforest) with some real
control over his or her relations to The Stack, as broad or as delimited as any one of
those addressable relations might be. Even if the User position is occupied by software,
such as Siri, this model is in some ways the opposite of the Taylorist archetype of the
User as automaton. In practice, this means not just that the specific entity that may
enter the User position requires some form of sovereign identification, but also that
the columns that this User makes up and down The Stack, linking intention through
interface, to addressable haecceity in the City, to energy-intensive Cloud provision and
back up the column to another User, do as well. An alternative is to address every single
User-Stack relation and every column initiated as a discrete haecceity and as the instantaneous mutual property of all the actors contributing to its realization.63 However, this
leaves the simplistic notion of sovereignty derived from property unimproved, and as
a design solution, it merely translates the opposed interests of some owner-Users and
some tenant-Users into the legacy vocabularies of a property conflict and all the structural inadequacies that entails. It does nothing to adjudicate their claims, or enforce the
mutual interests of good actors, or protect them from the cost of bad actors, and more.
The User cosmopolitanism on offer at the Shanghai Expo to the Reids and to all the
rest of us is based on the constitutional precondition that total statistical transparency
of the User as the composite weight of his interactions is the price to pay for political
voice, exit, or entrance. For some, that social nudity may be nonnegotiable, whereas
for others, privacy and opacity are just like other premium services and allow them
some measure of protection.64 Framing the User as a free agent whose person, privacy,
and actions are his property to be leased and fortified according to market demand,
and couching User sovereignty in privacy markets, is but one suspicious point of agreement between Assange and neo-Austrian libertarians.65 “Privacy,” of course, is a deeply
paradoxical ethos that does very different things under different circumstances.66 The
axiomatization of individual privacy as a first-order principle of political systems is
also a salve for those made insecure by an insulted sense of self-command, and it’s a
very limited program for the geodesign of the User layer of The Stack. Counterintuitive
as it may seem, the design decision should not be to locate sovereignty in the encapsulated person who steps into the User position but instead into the position itself.67
Particular agents may step into or out of composite User assemblages (as tangible as

User Layer

287

a Google Car or as intangible as a trace over time), and their interests do not remain
stable as they do so. From The Stack’s perspective, the User is both the edge-state on
the other side of the Interface and the agent initiating columns back down into its layers; it is defined by what it connects to, not by who or what it “is.” In a way, the NSA
revelations demonstrate this. The target of message interception in many cases was
the metadata attached to any communication of interest. “It’s only ‘metadata,’” some
scoffed. “What’s the big deal?”68 Of initial interest is how a particular thread within
the larger landscape is located in time and geography, what systems and networks it
passed through, and, most important, the corresponding metadata for the receivers of
the thread. From these, we believe that analysts can reconstruct specific networks of
Users, monitoring their rhythms and intensities.69 While the semantic content of what
a message says is obviously of some interest to the analyst, in order to knit the haystack
in which needles hide, he collages metadata to reconstruct its patterns. In the terms of
The Stack, this is more directly a policing of columns than it is of individual persons
who are Users. The regular channels of association across layers and scales become the
target of opportunity. Palantir’s analysts, for example, use the company’s software to
provide structure to unstructured government data, and so their work provides for us
at least a reasonable model for the sort of activities that Snowden’s leaks shed light
on. But instead of watching from some sterilized perch, even the User of the Palantir
software is participating in the tracing of the column. “Palantir’s central privacy and
security protection would be ... ‘the immutable log.’ Everything a user does in Palantir
creates a trail that can be audited. No Russian spy, jealous husband or Edward Snowden
can use the tool’s abilities without leaving an indelible record of his or her actions.”70
This meta-metadata recursivity is a key aspect for how such systems function. The fact
that analyst B has already established links between persons X and Y becomes the trail
that analyst C explores. The query becomes the quarry. Meta-meta-metadata of any event
in the world becomes in a sense the event itself, and just like you or me, the event itself,
the column, also secretes more information that it contains within it. The policing of
columns, their metadata, all the way down into the abyss strongly suggests that tolerance for vertigo is an important attribute for designers of Stack governance.
The expansion of suffrage toward ever more universal inclusion is almost always
met with indignance (at the very least) by many of those whose privileged position
is shifted that much off center. The same is true for Copernican rotations of human
autophenomenology off its axis. When the two combine forces, there cannot not be
trouble, and the ongoing geopolitical surfacing of the posthuman User will be a far
more complicated political and anthropological event than is a technological one.71
Engineering for animals, AI, and robots is much easier than designing and enforcing the terms of their participation acceptable to those now asked to make room, but
what some will call a fundamentalist reification of the atomic private human as the
sovereign core for the User layer of The Stack cannot sustain that engineering for very

288

User Layer

long. It’s not sufficient. In the short run—yes—the blunt-edge illuminations regarding
surveillance platforms are to be defended against duplicitous cynicism and opportunism; but in the long run, the agenda that matters most is that another User position
must be composed and defended. The atomic citizen User, forever scandalized and
seeking revenge against the inevitable failures of a enemy regime, wearing sacralized
revelations of wrongdoing, cannot be depended on to provide the resilient geopolitical
design that is required. Assange can nail his 99 Theses to the virtual door of power as
many times as he needs to, but it will not bring forth the necessary atheism but rather
retrenchment of the wrong fundamentals. I believe that instead of pleading the Jeffersonian wounds over and over, the more radical and prudent line of sight is toward
carving defensible space around the nonhuman User in order to explore the literatures
by which human beings can become part of their set. This plays with role reversal
and drag, as in Jean Genet’s The Balcony, or the old Google Glass App that let the User
control the pitch and yaw of a quadrotor drone by tilting his head, even though we all
know the drone is really controlling his neck muscles (sic).72 Recording becomes playback and playback a variation on recording, swapping tempos: the ultimate promiscuity of the roles—apparatus, interface, and subject—all can be recast by one another in
the arc of watching someone else watch you, and to watch yourself watching it over
again while pretending to be the camera.73
Put differently, at the same time that the User encrypts its membranes against violations from the outside, the system itself always inoculates itself against bad actor Users.
Corporate IT departments are funded precisely to ensure this biopolitical security, but
the platform commons demands guarantees of resilience and coherence against both
vectors of risk. A different model User is required, but how? Benedict Singleton has
developed a design theory based on metis and cunning, for which design is the instigation of traps.74 All species are at work to design their interactions with the world so as
to trap what they need, and for humans the institutionalization of these traps is where
design and governmentality intersect. This is not just an immoral tendency for natural
and sexual selection; it is how intelligence leverages ecological interdependencies so as
to modulate them by strategies and tactics.75 Like Grosz’s framing of the Earth presents
design as a primordial geography, a design ontology of traps foregrounds instead a
violent symbiosis as the frame’s actual strategy revealed. Different things require different traps, and each becomes ensnared in the trap of the other, around and around,
a trap within a trip within a trap stabilized over time: flowers and bees, orchids and
wasps, bees and wasps, Venus fly-trap and fly, fly and dirt, dirt and flower, photograph
and memory. Ensnared one within the other, the “user” of each design encapsulates
another while being itself encapsulated, infecting and infected at once, integrities
crumbling.76 This is part of the architecture of biology, this is a model for communities
of Users one inside the other. Far weirder than Larry Smarr’s gut microbes, nested parasitic biostrata are in some cases embedded five levels deep inside the other (fifth-order

User Layer

289

hyperparasitism): animal inside animal inside animal inside animal inside animal, user
inside user inside user.77 This symbiotic recursion could be called a microplatform, but
it’s more than that; it is not just the negotiation among actors within the User position;
it is a durable interpenetration of actors, mutually embedded one within the other.
This is the primal scene that should have been on display at the Shanghai Expo as the
root pedagogy of the universal User, not the mannequin zoology of the Reids and the
Hagens. This dissolution of the private human User comes not through the white noise
of absolute quantification or mathematically guaranteed withdrawal from appearance, but through the plodding evolution toward alternative phenotypes in relation to
manic apparatuses, both internal and external. The dispersant is not thanatos, a slouching toward deliquesce, but an activist attentiveness to the more open geographies available to our composite inhuman alternatives. So, again, forget human-centered design;
we need to design for what comes next, what comes outside, what has already arrived,
for the synthetic User-subjects for which another geopolitics is derived. These come
from the division, segmentation, and multiplication of partial and compound Users
into diagonal organs, both bigger and smaller than any one body or person. In this,
the geopolitical design problem is drawn as a planetary resorting and redistribution of
envelopes, interfaces and membranes, hard and soft, enabling forms of political sovereignty and geography that will enforce a more adventurous futurity, along a path of
anguished falling toward our own special void. That, as well, is the design brief.

III

The Projects

The Stack to Come

Secrets are lies.
—The Circle, company policy1
Surveillance is theft.
—Writers against Mass Surveillance2
Autonomy is abstraction.
—Chris Anderson, 3D Robotics3
Convenience means not secure.
— Jacob Appelbaum, Tor project4
Fear is awareness.
—Charles Manson5

68. Seeing The Stack We Have, Stacks to Come
The Stack we have means: borderlines are rewritten, dashed, curved, erased, automated;
algorithms count as continental divides; the opposition of chthonic versus geometric
territory is collapsed by computation; interfaces upon interfaces accumulate into networks, which accumulate into territories, which accumulate into geoscapes (territories
comprising territories, made and so entered into, not entered into and so made); the
embedded is mobilized and the liquid is tethered down into shelter and infrastructure;
the flat, looping planes of jurisdiction multiply and overlap into towered, interwoven
stacks; the opaque is transcribed and the transparent is staged, dramatized, and artificialized; irregular allegiances are formalized (the enclave and exclave, for diasporic
and satellite expatriates); both futurist and medievalist scenarios confiscate, one from
another, the program of supercomputational utopias; and the incomplete(able) com-

294

The Stack to Come

prehensiveness of Earth’s archives is folded back on itself as a promiscuous, ambient
geopolitics of consumable electrons.
These are predicaments that condition us, but design is out of sync with them at
present. Some design appears in advance of what it wants to describe, while other
designs lag behind what has already arrived but may not be recognized and named. The
Stack-we-have does both, and so The Stack-to-come is drawn by a geoaesthetics and a
geodesign that is, at best, seen now in a kind of double exposure: one future that is
anonymously present with us, arrived but unnamed, and one that is already named but
not yet here. As discussed at the very beginning of the book, to grasp that other geography, our attention is split between these two concurrent images that we must hold
in mind at once, even as they blend into the other, both with and without our control.
Our capacity to now design, govern, and draw sovereign geographies depends on the
management of this blur. First, how has sovereignty already been redesigned, whether
or not we can properly name or comprehend the character of all effects, and second,
how can the genesis of another geopolitical geometry deliberately recast the terms of
sovereignty that would give those realized formations some preferable structure? The
unseen and arrived is interlaced with the seen and the delayed, the blur is precisely
this oscillation between “what is” but does not yet have a name, and “what might
become” because we can give it name in advance of its arrival. The challenge requires
imagination but also enforcement, the establishment of foundations, the techniques
of strategic position and material fabrication, such that they can form one another and
form us through them. To hold the two images in mind is also to bring into focus the
variables of their interpolation and to trace the pixelated translation between them. At
the same time, the sorting of any single User-subject effect, yours or mine, is also an arc
of decay, marked for itself only in passing, such that any entry point into The Stack is
fixed by what we exchange among one another in passing: money, carbon, electrons,
affect, law, territory—one serving as the referent standard for the other without final
grounding. Its scope is global, but the interfaces into the machine, and the visible diagram of the work that it does, are always only partial.
With these caveats and limits, it is possible to see what appears to us as a reasonably
complete image of the whole, and even to leverage this totality as a way to draw what
might replace it, sooner or later. Perhaps we can see all the layers at once, both as what
they are and as what they do. We start at the bottom of the image and move up, from
Earth to User, in one vertical tracking shot.6 The black death of oil is formed into brilliant plastic mobile decks; heterogeneous minerals are pulled from mountain streams
in central Africa and elsewhere; satellite networks expand the circumference of the
Earth, bearing down with optimized images of a denuded whole, now turned from a
map into an interface and, in turn, into a vast planetary epidermis to be governed as a
total living image. All this is powered by an Ouroboros-shaped energy grid that distributes electrons in peer-to-peer packet networks and so may rationalize and lighten the

The Stack to Come

295

carbon burden of industrial computation, or may consume the last remaining terawatts
and carbon dioxide gigatons into a black hole of data center–shaped future ruins. In
doing so, it spawns new jurisdictions of those causing and those affected by climate
change, turning the ecology itself into the final emergency against which we try to
defend ourselves in a losing battle with the mathematics of systems biology.
Moving our gaze just upward to the Cloud layer, we see vast logistics archipelagos
and far-flung subterranean server farms, some outside normative jurisdictional control,
and all superimposing irregular partial polities over locations and Users, interweaving themselves with state claims. Google Grossraum delaminates polity from territory
and reglues it into various unblendable sublayers, weaving decentralized supercomputing through increasingly proprietary networks to hundreds of billions of device end
points. Each of these is also a sensor and tracking node feeding information back into
the proto-sovereign Cloud platform, which uses this to draw new maps of state space
and also to absorb it into new formats (Clouds becoming de facto states, states becoming Cloud platforms). This activates open-ended platform wars over identity, currency,
logistics, devices, services, and infrastructure, with no player capable of fully remapping all links between the mobile citizen-user, data center location, and national laws.
And so, we are left with specters of Cloud feudalism and cosmpolitanism, both at once.
We try to trace where this goes and from where it came. Archaic states drew their
authority from the regular provision of food, and over the course of modernization,
more was added to the intricate bargains of Leviathan: energy, infrastructure, legal
identity and standing, objective and comprehensive maps, credible currencies, and
flag-brand loyalties. Bit by bit, all of these and more are now provided by Cloud platforms, not necessarily as formal replacement for the state versions but, like Google ID,
simply more useful and effective for daily life. For these, the terms of participation are
not mandatory, and because of this, their social contracts are more extractive than constitutional. The Cloud Polis draws revenue from the cognitive capital of its Users, who
trade attention and microeconomic compliance in exchange for global infrastructural
services, and it in turn it provides each of them with an active, discrete online identity
and the license to use that infrastructure. Before the full ambition of the state cybersecurity apparatuses were so evident, it was thought by many that the Cloud was a place
where states had no ultimate competence or maybe even a role to play; they were seen
as too slow, too dumb, too easily outwitted by using the right browser.7 States would be
cored out, component by component, until nothing was left but a well-armed health
insurance scheme with its own World Cup team. In the long run, that may still perhaps
be the outcome, with modern liberal states taking their place next to ceremonial monarchs, stripped of all but symbolic authority, not necessarily replaced but displaced and
misplaced to one side. But now we hear the opposite, equally brittle conclusion that
the Cloud is only the state, that it equals the state and that its totality (figural, potential)
is intrinsically totalitarian. Despite all, I wouldn’t take that bet either.

296

The Stack to Come

Tilting our eyes slightly higher, we see that the urban fabric has shifted from huntergatherer landscapes to sedentary fortresses and back to itinerant mobilities between
enclaves and exclaves, linking not just points within one city but all cities as a discontiguous constellation. It transforms dwellers into Users of an integrated energy, carbon,
cement, information aggregation, adding as many points of quasi-sovereign access as
they draw lines, borders, and walls. Its primary architectural expression, besides the
distributed grid, is the totality of the megastructure, erecting new topologies of control
and overexposure, built into the programmatic field of ambient interfaces. These interfaces are integral to platform logics of simultaneous centralization through ubiquitous
decentralization and decentralization through the investment of each interface with
supercomputational capacity. Competing for air, multiple interfacial totalities cohabitate in and on urban surfaces, including the dense extreme parametric articulation of
architectural envelopes. These are pregnant with computational intricacy, freezing a
field of forces that is, however, always itself in motion and never finally reducible to
formal mediation, and thereby splitting any politics of the envelope between those
physical membranes and the equally determining electromagnetic delineations thrown
up by information media and protocols. In the multiplication of these, accidental sovereignties are made available to anyone or anything interpolated as a User of those dual
systems and of the city that couches them. That city is in turn part of a layer of the
larger Stack hollowing some old territories into zombie jurisdictions and generating
new as yet informal alegal openings. For other Users, it composes elaborate megastructural enclaves and geoglyphs, even for Cloud platforms themselves, each competing to
express itself as an urban-scale subject and each also paired with its own doppelganger
megastructure on which it depends and through which its total enclosure is always
contaminated.
Swirling just closer to the top of the image, we see that any instance, singular or plural, of matter, particle or wave, is potentially identified by massive universal addressing
systems, in which mapping and linking of Avogadro’s number of haecceities may be
allotted to every User. The global credential of the address subdivides heterogeneous
territories, hard and soft, Hertzian space and carbon space, into a disintegrated communicative array, an atmospheric metropolis built of digit strings. The addressability
of physical objects withdrawn into their specific enumeration is itself overmatched
by the addressability of abstract relations between objects and their compositing and
sorting into higher-order sets, any of which also address and are addressed by one
another in a process that is itself addressed by them: meta-addressing all the way up
and down into the abyss. This deep address is not only a mechanism for the capture
of what exists and a formalization of their juxtaposition; it is also a medium for the
creative composition of the traces, positions, and interrelations between them, across
natural scales and tempos, drawing otherwise illegible forms into a wider Internet of
haecceities. This places micron-scale processing of Shannon information into irregular

The Stack to Come

297

meshes of networked matter and substantialized abstractions, toward absolute communication and absolute incommunication at once, as multiple maps and geographies
name and number intersecting territories and enroll addressees into assemblages that
may be effectively invisible to one another. As any addressee is compelled to appear to
one platform of ubiquitous computation, this compulsion may also guarantee its disappearance from alternative addressable landscapes to which it may be all but invisible.
In the end, the mastery of master perspectives is overcome by the proliferation of other
master perspectives that cannot recognize, let alone contain, one another.
Four of the six layers are seen now at once, and above them we locate Interfaces,
particularly graphical user interfaces (GUIs) that make legible the far-flung Earth,
Cloud, City, and Address layers of this Stack for Users who cannot possibly map the
cause-and-effect relations of their own actions without some instrumental narrative.
As they multiply, Interfaces assemble into interfacial regimes that present and enforce
synthetic diagrammatic total images of how the entire platform can work for a User
who perceives that platform through the grammar of that same regime. In turn as
the User’s own actions are also sensed and read by the Interface; they are incorporated
into its totality and into governing procedures for monetizing User activities according to that regime’s own aesthetics of logistics. Hand-based tools may have passed for
a moment into iconic point-and-click modes of the interface, but they now return
to embodied gesture and perception, including App subplatforms that introduce new
interfacial capacities to generic hardware. In this naturalistic synthesis of cognition and
interfaciality, the metaphorical space between icon and what it represents, or between
the single interface and the platform it interfaces, begins to implode. Subsequently,
some platform totalities are drawn into theological projections, for which the work
of anamnesis is externalized into perceptual-instrumental events that pre-decide the
significance of real world interface elements, as well as the terms of encounter the User
should have with them. We fear a militarization of cognition itself, as avant-garde and
atavistic fundamentalisms move into the direct augmentation of reality and new political theologies emerge alongside them. Again, totalities are layered on top of totalities,
but here the elemental terms of their superimposition are a catechism of war.
Enrollment and motivation according to the interfacial closures of a political theological totality might work by ludic sequences for human Users or by competitive algorithmic ecologies for nonhuman Users. But for each the proto-sovereignty of the User is
drawn from both the artificial individuation of each User as well as the dissolution of
that individuation by the overwhelming accumulation of incorporating information
flows, some parasitic and others infrastructural. First, the political economic position
of User, born of Taylorist rationalization, becomes the site of a different universality for
which the User-subject position is circumscribed in the measurement of its appetite for
carbon, energy, water, and data: the footprint. But eventually the maximal user—the
absolutely quantified and qualified self—is dissolved by the intersection of multiple

298

The Stack to Come

indexes and traces; its singularity is drawn and quartered by the accumulation of its
relations. Further, the interfacial apparatus that coheres the human User as an economic subject also addresses nonhuman agents (algorithmic, animal, and machine
users) with the same ease, placing all Users on a common plane and shifting the design
question for the platform from a design for Users to a design of Users.
This is The Stack-we-have. We can see it as one image and so perhaps can also see
how it might be recomposed as a whole. Our most lucid attention now needs to be
on the Stacks-to-come. The fissiparous geopolitics of Stacks includes the adjustments
noted above as well as strategic Stack-versus-Stack warfare (“destroying a society one
controller at a time”). Any of the possible Stacks-to-come can each be imagined as a
whole, linking some User down to Earth, or they may intersect layer by layer, producing
heterogeneous mixtures. Any relationship with or between infrastructural technologies might converge or diverge according to plan, or despite the plan, but can also be
undone by Users driving columns into and out of other Stacks’ layers. In the Cloud layer
chapter, I outlined some of the logics of four existing platforms as Cloud Polis models
(Google, Apple, Amazon, and Facebook) in order to demonstrate that their particular
strategic combinations are not inevitable, and so just as we can imagine new combinations of these four, all the possible Stacks-to-come will be (as Stacks are now) made
useful by real Users in dynamic amalgamations. The User layer of one model links to
the Interface layer of another to the Address layer of a third, all perhaps situated in a City
layer unreferenced by any of these three but drawing on the Cloud Polis of the second
and the Earth layer of the first. The agnostic generosity of universal resolvers enables
overlapping jurisdictions, and as a User moves from Stack to Stack to Stack, moment by
moment, it also enables multiple and simultaneous sovereign positions.
These intersections are the normal condition with which and against which design
must work, and there are at least four ways that adjustment between layers and between
Stacks can be anticipated. They can be adjusted by the overlapping of one layer from
one Stack by a column through a layer of another (as described above). There is also
an adjustment in space, whereby two layers and two Stacks are situated adjacent to one
another, like two cities. If a single User is in location X, then he can access Interface
layer X, but if he is in location Y, then he will access Interface layer Y. A User traveling
to another country who has to access another “foreign” wireless network is a familiar
example of how two Interface layers may relate to one another by their adjacency in
physical space. There is also an adjustment of sequentiality and of the relation between
layers and Stacks over time. A User may access two different relatively homogeneous
Stacks, one after the other, such that the use of the first makes possible the use of the
second, or the use of one layer within one Stack may be a prerequisite for the use of
another layer within the same Stack (which it usually is) or within another. It’s not
hard to imagine different security scenarios that require a very specific sequence of
actions to precede others. There are also adjustments in scale, both between Stacks

The Stack to Come

299

and between layers. As discussed in the Interface chapter, an interface can be as small
as an icon on a screen or as large as a security barrier between two countries. A User
could be as “small” as an algorithm executed on a particular server or as “large” as the
human population of a City combined over the span of a year. A Stack will work just
as well with a tight scalar fit between what is situated at different layers (i.e., a human
User and a standard keyboard Interface) or a loose scalar fit (i.e., a tiny algorithm and
a distant megastructure, such as for Stuxnet). The Stack, and therefore also the design
of The Stack, is qualified by these kinds of simultaneities, correspondences, parallels,
desynchronizations, mismatches, and phase shifts.
As far as geodesign is concerned, that blur between one Stack and another is not a
symptom to be clarified and cured; rather, the blur is a high-resolution image of what
is actually happening, which itself is blurry. To design with the blur instead of against it
requires comfort with ambiguity. The hope is that we do have some handle on how to
visualize The Stack today and how it organizes generic columns up and down. Without
too much trouble, we can model a baseline scenario of an individuated human Usercitizen, named and profiled, using a vanilla platform Interface, connected to a stable
mix of IP-addressed websites and smart objects, situated in a specific City connecting to
a public/private mix of WiFi microterritories, governed by the application architecture
of a global Cloud platform such as Google, and, at the Earth layer, drawing on local
hydroelectric and coal plants that power the servers chiefly accessed by his usage. We
can also imagine another Stack in which the User is a environmental sensor, the interface is a data-reporting application programming interface (API), Addresses are assigned
to individual threshold chemical events as detected, all working in the City layer of a
threatened rainforest as part of a transnational carbon risk reinsurance Cloud platform
and pulling low-wattage power from plentiful solar and chemical energy sources. We
can draw another Stack in which an assemblage of two robots, three delimited algorithms activated from afar, and three humans on three different continents constitute
the composite User, linking them at the Interface layer through a Shanghainese fork of
Android that translates between the five or six different “languages” at work. We can
imagine them mapping and acting on a specific culinary-agricultural assemblage that
has been Addressed according to Bronze Age dietary conventions, located in multiple,
even hostile, City-states, accessing a mix of several public Cloud applications as well as
locally encrypted databases, sucking up an all-of-the-above stew of utility electrons. Or,
an unnamed kid at a quasi-public 3D printing works in Lagos using two different open
source additive manufacturing APIs, downloaded CAD scripts, and YouTube Uploader
to spoof the Addresses of pirated bicycle cranks that will now phone home and report
that they are actually licensed and operational in Cape Town, but which are really being
used to haul bags of cement to the fourth floor of a building that shows up having only
two floors on Google Earth RealTime (at least when queried from South African IPs) all
running on the AfriNIC version of Google’s “no carrier fee” Continent Cloud, sucking

300

The Stack to Come

energy from a Franco-Chinese nuclear plant on the shores of Lake Chad, and chewing
up circuitry minerals recycled from e-waste drone lifts from Bossangoa, Central African
Republic, courtesy of All-African Defense Forces. And so on. It is not too hard to come
up with political science-fiction scenarios, but it is hard to specify the shape of them
working in combination, if only because any of the layers in the scenarios above could
just as easily be combined with the layers of any of the others. Take two to five layers
from each and sort, stir, and simmer. We need not one but many Stack design theories.
Even the US Department of Defense are Stack theorists, having made their own version
of a Stack model of planetary-scale computation in semisecrecy and featuring layers
similar to the one described in this book (unknown to me until very recently).8 Instead
of neat utopias or dystopias, it is the divergent mixtures of the two, drawing on the
energy loss and radiant waste materials of whatever is most distant or closest at hand,
which may nevertheless be most crucial and fruitful.
69. Earth Layer to Come: God Bows to Math; Will Leviathan?9
A side effect of the unmanned programs of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), particularly Viking’s initial probes to the surface of Mars, is what Kim
Stanley Robinson calls comparative planetology, the consideration of pattern and difference among astronomical bodies.10 Arguably, the leverage of such a perspective would
be greater than that of the more iconic visual knowledge of the Apollo “Earthrise” or
“blue marble” photographs, which demonstrated the formal coherency of Earth as one
geophysical unit.11 Now the special singularity of that sample can be measured by comparing variation among like and unlike cousins, each of which represents an alternative
chemical reality from which or toward which our own perch might be distinguished
and interpreted. Given that other planets are assembled from the same chemical ingredients as is Earth (still mostly hydrogen, helium, some carbon, bits of other things,
albeit in different ratios), the far end of the comparability is the full spectrum of possible recombinations of elements “computing” one another into the relative molecular stability of a planetary sphere. The universe could, in principle, disassemble one
astronomic body and build a couple others out of the raw material, and in fact, in
astronomic time, that is more or less how planets are made.
Seen from this outside, the Earth layer of The Stack is ultimately not only the plateau
from which emerges the material and energy to run the other layers of a closed tower;
it is also—in a sense—the basis of a second planetary computer, one laid on top of a first
whose calculations resulted in the relative ecological and chemical stability of our planetary situation. More often than not, globally pervasive eco-computing is validated by
a diagnosis model; it provides us with a way to detect pathologies. We detect pollution
or telltale ecological traces in one way or another and render them as evidence. It is
a way to visualize the invisible evil, drawing its picture so we can see where it is and

The Stack to Come

301

where it goes, and one way or another prevent it from happening again. The maximal
design image of pervasive computation—of this second planetary computer—is understood both rightly and wrongly as a smearing of the planet’s surface with an objective
computational film that would construct a stream of information about the performance of our shared socionatural spaces through which geopolitical decisions can be
made. Within a material public based on a truly ubiquitous computational infrastructure, the political formations that would cohere might be based on the aggregation of
encounters and relationships between persons, things, and material events, including
especially those in which people are not directly involved. But even if everything is
seen and registered, not everything sees or works back on what it sees in the same way.
Part of the design question then has to do with interpreting the status of the image of
the world that is created by that second computer, as well as that mechanism’s own image
of itself, and the way that it governs the planet by governing its model of that planet.
That model is built on the interrelationship of nonhuman biologies and chemistries
as well, and so the images that the designer can deduce or produce serve the representational agency to a matrix that otherwise would be invisible to itself beyond its most
local chemical interactions.
The status of that ecology in relation to the designer, considered now in emergent
models of software and sovereignty, conjoins sensing, sense-making, and image-making into a generic infrastructure of sensors, databases, displays, firmware-in-the-wild,
and so on—in other words, a “stack” system that both reflects and congeals what it
“represents” technically and politically. The columns going up and down the paths of
this Stack link a politics of seeing to a politics of our being seen, and through them,
one becomes the other. It compiles a diagnostic image by diagramming present and
potential relationships between agents within its line of sight. We assume that any
(human or nonhuman) component’s ability to recognize and consume that image,
and thereby also consume the projection of a set of potential governable relationships
between the variables within that interface, does so not just for utilitarian imperative
but with real affective intensity. In this utility and intensity, another proposition is
made about how it is that we may sense the world, or how the sensibility of the world
might be distributed or organized, made infrastructural, and activated to become part
of how the landscape understands and narrates itself. It is not only a diagnostic image
then; it is a tool for a geo-politics in formation, emerging from the parametric multiplication and algorithmic conjugation of our surplus projections of worlds to come,
perhaps in mimetic accordance with one explicit utopian conception or another, and
perhaps not. Nevertheless, the decision between what is and is not governable may
arise as much from what the model computational image cannot do as much as from
what it can. Its geopolitical effects are as reliant on stockpiles of failures as on capacities for success. This is no less true of the surplus of interfacial utopias constituted
with information visualization than it is for the parliamentary politics born of an

302

The Stack to Come

agrarian time and persisting long enough to provide funding for those Viking missions to Mars.
And so, “comparative planetology” works not only between this astronomic body
and that one, but also between one body and the computational model that simulates
it and governs it in turn. For the Earth layer of The Stack, the fragility of this model
comes also from its purported successes, and specifically, from how much it underestimates the difficulty of achieving them. Core to the utopian project for pervasive
computation and ecological governance is positing a world in which every square inch
is in some way constantly outpouring infinitely communicable information about
itself, overwhelming some expert systems while spawning others, enabling the world
to declare itself as data tectonics. From this another polity could emerge in this parametric swarm of information secretion and consumption, one that represents itself
to itself through these enforceable representations. It implies (perhaps) a flatter, a less
authoritarian, a less anonymous, less humanistic (and even less designed) geopolitical
space—or perhaps instead just another mode and method for its design. However, the
simpler and sadder truth is that we are, as of now, incapable of governing ourselves
according to the already available, more rudimentary information that ecologies communicate. A clouded river, a shrunken branch, a coughing fish: these are also instances
of “data visualization,” and we do a bad job of interpreting them and acting on them.
At best, we attempt to pathologize them and even criminalize them because they do
not conform to quality metrics and thresholds (and higher resolution of images of the
pathology will not ensure that the model can govern better). Still, perhaps the problem
is also that the vast plurality of worldly actors are left out of the picture, and perhaps by
rendering those variables visible and transmissible, by incorporating them at the scale
of a planetary archive, those “trees” become things for which political engineering can
be more systematic and effective. The most difficult question for this design-and-monitor-and-diagram system remains whether a more appropriate geopolitical architecture
can be deduced from and designed by and for the Earth layer.
In petabyte-aggregations of ecological knowledge and application, is there a channel for these instances to pluralize, to assemble into networks of different size, so that
they can in fact become more durable forms and be properly empowered to make
gestures at the scale of the forces that affect their fates? Can the “second planetary
computer” create worlds and images of worlds that take on the force of law (if not its
formality) and effectively exclude worse alternatives? If so, its mediations will surely
include some abdication of the central piloting role of modern political subjects as
played by the anthropic “human” who is the geological agent of the Anthropocene.
Here technical representation and political representation become more symmetrical
and less rather than more “parliamentary.” The process by which sovereignty is made
more plural becomes a matter of producing more than discoursing: more about pushing, pulling, clicking, eating, modeling, stacking, prototyping, subtracting, regulating,

The Stack to Come

303

restoring, optimizing, leaving alone, splicing, gardening and evacuating than about
reading, examining, insisting, rethinking, reminding, knowing full-well, enacting,
finding problematic, and urging. In these, mediation and translation between ecology
and model move from one scale to another, up and down and back again, and that
itinerary is where the action is and where the story plays out.
In structural engineering, when the pressure difference between the outside and
the inside of a building causes heat to rise up from the bottom, floor by floor, and try
to escape from the top, this is called the stack effect. In the cycle of energy into and
out of data centers, up through the layers to the User, a corollary process is at work for
planetary-computational stacks as well, which is on the whole bad news for the ecology
that it would hope to model. At the same time, it bears repeating that with terrestrial,
oceanic, satellite, and atmospheric sensing networks, it is only through the medium of
the Stack itself that we know so precisely how the carbon appetite of The Stack is contributing so decisively to our Anthropocenic predicament in the first place. This paradox (some may call it a self-cancellation) is only one reason that there is such strong
disbelief that the current geopolitical, geoeconomic, or geoecological order can continue in its present form. We experience a crisis of “ongoingness” that is both the cause
and effect of our species’ inability to pay its ecological and financial debts. The Stack
itself, this accidental megastructure, is surely as well a result of these same processes,
and it may be seen as symptomatic from one perspective or emergent from another,
but its ability to mature as a form of intelligence is dependent on learning to not cannibalize its planetary host. I also argue that some conceivable versions of a future Stack
have a decisive role to play in making intractable problems of governance and design
far less dangerous, and the abstract machine of the Earth layer’s second planetary computer is among these. Another argument laced throughout this book is that the necessary intellectual and technological achievements are not at hand, that we must make
them so, and toward that we must be willing to entertain shifts in the relationship
between software and sovereignty, taken as our primary example. That said, the picture
is far from rosy. Despite appearances, one can easily argue that technological progress
has slowed since the last quarter of the twentieth century (the 1973 oil crisis to be
specific). The low-hanging fruits (e.g., the speed of transcontinental flight, increase in
age expectancy, median income in affluent societies, crop yields, truly significant new
medicines) have been gathered up, and in many cases their rate of progress has either
slowed or even reversed.12 Meanwhile, commodity prices have continued to rise, clean
energy has yet to materialize at a necessary scale, and atmospheric carbon dioxide has
broken the 400 parts per million barrier. It is true at the same time that the number of
people living in extreme poverty (as defined by the dollar value of their daily available
purchasing power) has been cut in half since only 1990, and the average family size, or
total fertility rate, has also halved since 1950 from almost 5 children to fewer than 2.5
(concurrently the percentage of people living in cities has gone from 20 percent to 50

304

The Stack to Come

percent in one hundred years and is projected to be 70 percent by 2050.) These are all
causes and effects of one another, each accomplishment coming at a sometimes savage
price and each calamity with a silver lining (of sorts). None of this, however, proves
that it is impossible to do what we know is required, but it may suggest that we are not
willing.
In a talk that I gave on the topic of popular discourse on innovation, a feeble genre
of “middlebrow megachurch infotaintment,” I said:
The most recent centuries have seen extraordinary accomplishments in improving quality of
life. The paradox is that the system we have now—whatever you want to call it—is in the short
term what makes the amazing new technologies possible, but in the long run it is also what suppresses their full flowering. Another economic architecture is prerequisite. … We hear that not
only is change accelerating but that the pace of change is accelerating as well. While this is true
of computational carrying-capacity at a planetary level, at the same time—and in fact the two are
connected—we are also in a moment of cultural de-acceleration. We invest our energy in futuristic
information technologies, including our cars, but drive them home to kitsch architecture copied
from the 18th century. The future on offer is one in which everything changes, so long as everything stays the same. We’ll have Google Glass, but still also business casual. This timidity is our
path to the future? No, this is incredibly conservative, and there is no reason to think that more
gigaflops will inoculate us. Because, if a problem is in fact endemic to a system, then the exponential effects of Moore’s law also serve to amplify what’s broken. It is more computation along the
wrong curve, and I doubt this is necessarily a triumph of reason. … [Our current conversation] has
too much faith in technology, and not nearly enough commitment to technology. It is placebo
technoradicalism, toying with risk so as to reaffirm the comfortable. So our machines get smarter
and we get stupider. But it doesn’t have to be like that. Both can be much more intelligent. Another futurism is possible.13

As far the Earth layer is concerned, “another futurism” is what we call geodesign,
which would include geoengineering, understood as possible techniques for ecological restoration operating directly upon the atmosphere, but certainly not only that.
There are other ways to intelligently and deliberately intervene in the architecture of
geopolitics, geoeconomics, and geoecology, and some of these recall “utopian” plans of
the Apollo era. The crisis of ongoingness may, however, demand that options that may
have once seemed fantastic are now imperative, and what is most normal is now also
the most unlikely path forward. In his essay, “Who Will Build the Ark?” Mike Davis
puts it this way:
From this perspective, only a return to explicitly utopian thinking can clarify the minimal conditions for the preservation of human solidarity in face of convergent planetary crises. I think I
understand what the Italian Marxist architects Tafuri and Dal Co meant when they cautioned
against “a regression to the utopian”; but to raise our imaginations to the challenge of the Anthropocene, we must be able to envision alternative configurations of agents, practices and social
relations, and this requires, in turn, that we suspend the politico-economic assumptions that
chain us to the present.14

The Stack to Come

305

The regression Davis mentions refers to a willingness to trade the comfort of ideal
“solutions” for the work of fundamental transformation, but perhaps given the precariousness of the situation, having learned to entertain the utopian impulse with
imaginative schemes may prove an extremely practical capability to possess. This also
relates to what Heidegger once called our “confrontation with planetary technology”
(an encounter that he never managed to actually make and which most Heideggerians
manage to endlessly defer, or “differ”).15 That encounter should be motivated by an
invested interest in several “planetary technologies” working at various scales of matter,
and based on, in many respects, what cheap supercomputing, broadband networking,
and isomorphic data management methodologies make possible to research and application. These include—but are no means limited to—geology (e.g., geochemistry, geophysics, oceanography, glaciology), earth sciences (e.g., focusing on the atmosphere,
lithospere, biosphere, hydrosphere), as well as the various programs of biotechnology
(e.g., bioinformatics, synthetic biology, cell therapy), of nanotechnology (e.g., materials, machines, medicines), of economics (e.g., modeling price, output cycles, disincentivized externalities), of neuroscience (e.g., behavioral, cognitive, clinical), and of
astronomy (e.g., astrobiology, extragalactic imaging, cosmology). In that all of these
are methodologically and even epistemologically informed by computer science (e.g.,
algorithmic modeling, macrosensors and microsensors, data structure optimization,
information theory, data visualization, cryptography, networked collaboration), then
all of these planetary technologies are also planetary computational technologies. The
question of planetary-scale computing addressed by this book is therefore not only a
topic for us to understand; it also names our mechanisms of inquiry. I would insist
on the inclusion as well of art, design, philosophy, film and literature (especially their
science fiction genres)—or at least my own preferred conception of them—which
themselves may or may not be computational. These are our key technologies for conceiving the inevitable ambiguities of planetary-scale computational computation and
its potential vectors up and out, but they don’t work well when they are asked to
resolve ambiguity instead of conspiring with it and cultivating its efficacy. The geodesign that I have in mind would draw on all of these in varying measures for its subject
matter, for its means, for what it may be called on to know, but it would also provide a
platform for these disciplines’ rotations from ways of knowing toward ways of making.
It may do this because there is no local, only global, to invert Bruno Latour’s well-known
and unfortunate maxim.16 To pull intelligently on one thread is to tug on the whole at
once, a whole that has come together in one particular way at one particular moment
in the form of a thread and someone to pull it.17 This not a wish for renewed human
mastery or transcendence. It is rather a call for the difficult, even traumatic work of
disenchantment and demystification and toward a geopolitics based on what our species knows that it knows about our limited position and on how we might recompose
ourselves accordingly.

306

The Stack to Come

Put differently, that situation is also characterized by an opposition between the
global plasticity of the second planetary computer and the Anthropocenic crisis of
ongoingness. While it may be that our position on the precipice of ecological collapse suggests an anti-cosmopolitanism based on sharing this Götterdämmerung, different economies have contributed to its inadvertent geoengineering in very different
ways and it is certain that how some groups accommodate the coming crisis will be
as equally pronounced and divided. It is sometimes said by the political right that
the dangers posed by climate change are overblown by leftists keen on using centralized anti-market regulatory measures as a matter of principle and eager to mobilize
them in the name of bad weather from the future, but the political opportunism of
climate-change denialists represents the more ominous teleology. The longer that effective interventions and mitigations are forestalled, the more catastrophic the eventual
outcomes will be, and the less likely that open and democratic societies will be able to
manage the deluge of life or death consequences. Many on those the political right are
well aware of this, but see it as an opportunity for the development of quasi-sovereign
enclaves in which those who can will consolidate their wealth and deploy it as a bulwark against both the ecological consequences of industrialization and the populations
that these effect most dramatically. For those who would prefer neo-Feudalism and/or
tooth-and-nail libertarianism, inaction on climate change is not denialism, rather it is
action on behalf of a different strategic conclusion.
Too often, notions of ecological cosmopolitics rely on rhetorical criteria of consensus, whether as a lifeboat ethics—that we are all in this together—or the supposed
self-evidence of Earth’s archive seen as a single space that can be made more communitarian. However, while it draws on an ethics of rationality, the geodesign I would
endorse doesn’t see dissensus as an exception to the norm but as a matter of fact (nor
does it see it as only and necessarily “political”). It doesn’t confuse the universality of
a shared planetary ecology with how its political geography subdivides sovereignties,
ones that are not only separate but may not even be interoperable. It is not that we
will split the middle but that, quite specifically, we speak different languages, live in
different worlds, and have different geophysical relations to capital as a design asset in
relation to emergencies. That said, the current ecological emergency extends, rather
than supersedes, the importance of totality as interpretive instrument, especially with
regards to planetary-scale computation. When I peruse with fascination all the rightwing conspiracies theories about “Green totalitarianism,” Agenda 21, and carbon police
confiscating McMansions, I can’t help but wonder if the right has a more active and
forceful vision (however goofball) for the left than the left does. At the same time, we
are sensitive that just as well-meaning initiatives too often sour into failure (and wonder if we should instead design evil things that will decay into something wonderful
and successful) we know that the anti-strategy of neo-feudal secession may, however
counterintuitively, usher in a geopolitics that provides a platform that—in time—may

The Stack to Come

307

unwind the social hierarchies that inaugurated it. Who knows? They may get what
they want, but they may not want what they get.18 With regards to this, the next section considers possible futures of the next layer of The Stack, and how the delimitation
of sovereignty from territory by global Cloud platforms, and the differing models of
Cloud Polis that they represent, supports the momentum of generalized secession (for
better and for worse) which may or may not evolve toward (away from) an institutionally normative Cloud feudalism.
70. Cloud Layer to Come: Cloud Feudalism and Its Discontents
Ground zero of robotic labor automation may be in California, but a few hundred miles
south and east of Silicon Valley in the San Joaquin Valley, where 1 percent of the US
farmland produces 8 percent of its agricultural output, generating at least $36 billion
for the state and over $100 billion in related economic activity. The area is the engine
that makes California the fifth largest supplier of food in the world, and its capital is
the crestfallen metropolis of Fresno (population 500,000). Fresno often comes near last
in urban quality-of-life polls, and even a quick visit to its dusty and mean avenues confirms the results. Roughly a third of all jobs in the city are tied directly to agriculture,
which makes the economy particularly vulnerable to downward wage pressures, as well
as to climate change–related drought. The pressures of increased efficiencies against
crop losses, toward crop diversity, and speed of delivery make agriculture an important
area for applied robotic automation (picking, sorting, transporting, as well as plantby-plant drone observation and diagnosis). These factors together nominate Fresno to
enjoy first-mover disadvantage in the evolution of similar urban centers toward broadband-dependent manoralism and serfdom (and evacuation) and its economy toward
Cloud feudalism. Detroit is the first case study we have of what automation can do to
an insufficiently diversified urban system, dependent on intensive assembly labor (it
is certainly not the only one, nor does it represent the inevitable outcome of physical computing as applied to infrastructure-scale manufacturing economies), but Fresno
may soon take its place next to it. Future scenarios for Cloud feudal life in Fresno are
mostly grim. Most remaining jobs might be related to servicing the automated logistics
and warehousing of food packets, not so dissimilar to working in an Amazon warehouse or FedEx routing facility, while the surplus population that has not or cannot
exit is largely unemployed and increasingly desperate.19
The Cloud is able to treat “food”—defined here as culturally and economically
desirable modules of proteins, vitamins, and sugars—as parcels or data packets in a
deep supply chain that incorporates local climate, soil, nutrients, seed systems, individual plant care, harvesting, sorting, warehousing, packaging, refrigeration, and
global product destination optimization, as well as the metagovernance of demand
modeling, crop diversification, qualitative and quantitative research, and, one hopes

308

The Stack to Come

as well, the geogovernance of nutrition and food health (this is to say nothing of multistory hydroponic megastructures growing onions, orchids, and okra in deep midnight). The intelligent industrialization of food is potentially an extremely positive
(even crucial) Anthropocenic strategy. If Heidegger self-servingly compared industrial
agriculture to “Auschwitz,” and today’s biofundamentalists sometimes use similar
imagery to demonize genetically modified organisms, we may prefer instead to see
the design of food platforms as less about preserving the experiential simulation of
preindustrial farming and eating (“A is for Apple”) and more like molecular gastronomy on a landscape scale, inventing amazing new forms from the calculative slurry.
In their seams of leisure, craft farms can be left to those with the time to indulge
pornographic fantasies of prelapsarian originalism. That is to say, Cloud feudalism is
neither desirable nor inevitable, even according to the processes that are trying hard
to birth it today.20
None of this gleaming promise screens out a reality determined by vastly inequitable relations to the wealth of the Fresno that we have and the Fresno toward
which we slouch. In time, cities such as these may not need so many people but
will have them nevertheless. They may not really be cities so much as city-shaped
refugee camps, and like all other camps, they are the inverse image of the enclaves
that spawn them. Those employed “in” Fresno may not even be inside city limits. If
we follow the thread of Alex Rivera’s Sleep Dealer (2008), a film in which California’s
agriculture is served by drone pilot/robot fruit pickers working remotely from behind
the sovereign wall separating the United States and Mexico, it is not unreasonable to
imagine a further logistic dehumanization of Fresno’s on-site population.21 Perhaps
the costs of piloting agricultural labor will be held down by global wage arbitrage,
pickers in Tijuana competing with pickers in Jakarta and Juneau to provide fast and
cheap results. That is, formal national jurisdiction may have far less to do with the
economics of Cloud feudalism than with whichever Cloud Polis, enclave platform, or
urban camp happens to counts a given worker as one of its Users. The elevation of
labor systems like Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, TaskRabbit, and Uber to infrastructural
scale suggests several paradoxical and even contradictory outcomes, both positive and
negative. One of these is well summarized as: “I’m really looking forward to a future
in which service employees are leased Google Glass so they can complete courses in
for-profit trade schools while simultaneously earning health care vouchers instead of
actual currency and Soylent instead of actual food.”22 We should add, however, that
the lease terms on that Glass set are conditional on whether the User actually won the
bid to pilot-pick avocados.
Cloud feudalism can be understood as a particular distribution of power between
central and commanding platform servers and quasi-autonomous, if relatively powerless, network clients as applied to human economic geography. Others have articulated
the problems associated with these sorts of arrangements, their deflationary impact

The Stack to Come

309

on demand-side growth, and their ultimate macroeconomic instability. Under such
regimes, platform economics works to monopolize power and wealth into centripetal
consolidations of extracted value, such that the ratio of value realized by those Users
who collaborate with the platform commons (User platform value) to those who own
claims on infrastructural profits (platform surplus value) is grotesquely misaligned. For
political dispositions across the ideological spectrum, the supposed solution is making
freedom of personal autonomy from platforms more absolute, up to and including
generalized secession. From one side, “the main achievement of the nation-state in the
last century has been the establishment of a uniform grid of heavily policed barriers
across the world. … Given a free movement of people, the whole neoliberal project
would collapse.”23 From another side, “If you value freedom, then I think that ‘exit’
comes out way ahead of ‘voice’ as a mechanism by which people can express their
preferences.”24 Under some real-world situations, the hard partition keeping people
in or keeping people out is itself given sovereign status, with its surface imbued with
maximal gateway intelligence, and in others the “elective” coordination of free market
actors and agents is seen in a proliferation of modular desiring machines, like a North
Korean stadium pageant without an actual country behind it, all decisions linked by
an ontological proletariat writing the rules of proprietary semantic webs. If everyone
(in principle) has the right of exit and to opt out of their citizenship end user agreement for another offered elsewhere, but all the good spots have already be taken by
high-end Cloud polities that feature strong exclusionary membership bylaws keeping
the plurality of humans at bay, then the differences between state violence on the border and posted rules of the gated community, between positive and negative freedom
essentially, are dark and bitter comedy.
The previous discussions of nomos emphasize the arbitrary but meaningful geometry of political geographic subdivisions, including secession. It begins with an image
of the Earth’s surface differentiated by chemical arrangements of water, land, and air.
Nation-states can be read in relation to these as petroglyphs written by law. They are
keen to concretize the integrity of virtual boundaries when ingress and egress are seen
to compromise asymmetries of power between zones of a synthetic landscape of loops
and bubbles. Enclaves, exclaves, and especially colonies drew another jigsaw on top of
the first, nonlinear and noncontiguous outlines of sovereign control rule.25 At various
times, this becomes a momentum for jurisdictional integration (as for the American
colonies in the 1770s, the European Union in the 1990s, Italy and Germany in the
nineteenth century), and at other times it is an equal momentum for disintegration (as
for the United States in the 1860s, India/Pakistan in the 1940s, the USSR in the 1990s,
and seemingly everywhere today). It takes different forms and seeks different ends:
schemes to break up California would mean political autonomy for Silicon Valley and
several more Senate seats; Special Economic Zones freeing up markets for commodity
assemblage by keeping hands and fingers on call in special factory camps; sovereign

310

The Stack to Come

wealth funds turning states into corporate actors; Supreme Court rulings turning corporate actors into holders of religious and political speech rights; neo-Confederates
once again taking control of one of the major US political parties; Saudi Arabia buying
sovereign farmland in Indonesia to secure its food future; the hard geopolitics of ongoing state-sponsored spying, hacking, and mutual recriminations; and so on. The great
migrations, psychodemographic segmentations, and biopolitical wall building are not
always about claiming more and more zero-sum territory at the expense of rivals. Sometime it means the opposite, even deliberately shrinking domains of sovereign interest
(Australia recently relinquished its sovereign claim on a nearby island so that it would
not have to take responsibility for refugees who landed there hoping to gain admittance to the jurisdiction and its protections). However, these examples of generalized
secession are not interoperable with one another, at least not in the same way that the
Westphalian platform for political consolidation made the form and formats of states
compatible. Instead, according to pressures of combination and separation, integration
and disintegration, bull markets in both nonpolarity and hyperpolarity collaborate to
assassinate unipolar geopolitical architectures.
Most are interested not only in drawing new legal lines for self-interested benefit, but
also in building the armature of occupation that will enforce those lines and give their
physical boundaries the force of law. These initiatives thereby spawn their own exceptions. China has several important urban jurisdictional anomalies, such the special
status of Hong Kong, Macau, and the Shanghai foreign concessions, and more recently,
its urbanization has been steered somewhat by a strict distinction between urban and
rural systems and populations, most clearly symbolized by the houkou license system,
which also generated a huge population of internal “illegal aliens.” The growth of new
cities, almost from scratch, but mostly on top of where old ones stood a few years ago,
drew on the fungibility of enforcing this credentialization of infrastructural access.
Elsewhere, a new kind of tabula rasa urbanism is seen in the charter city movement, as
evangelized by New York University economist Paul Romer. The city remains a crucial
site for challenges to traditional spatial models of sovereignty and innovation in what
might augment or displace them, and Romer has advised plans for a “charter city” in
Trujillo, Honduras, one administered by the courts of Mauritius and, in principal, open
to qualified persons who may choose to reside there. Here individual sovereignty is
derived from the access to and use of a common urban infrastructure network more
than autochthonous genealogy. Such schemes are certainly not without the dystopian
potential of the absolute capitalization of habitat, but at the same time, in the delinking of transient sovereignty from fixed geography, they also contain an important kernel of utopian potential for geodesign invention, one that instead of eradicating place
would reestablish it anew for a network society.26 One hopes so, but the more immediate context of contemporary sovereignty markets would seem by appearances to tilt
toward privatopias.

The Stack to Come

311

Neil Blomkomp’s film Elysium (2013) is based on the parable of two Earths, one wallowing in the Anthropocenic decay of a burned-out planet and one orbiting above in
bucolic (if run-of-the-mill) privilege.27 Like the Cloud megastructures discussed in the
City layer chapter, feudal megastructures such as these always come in pairs. Bloomfield
Hills comes with South Detroit; Silicon Valley comes with its San Joaquin Valley. Today
new enclave developments, and soon charter cities looping around them, are marketed
as branded service platforms. In time, they will require more than this. In order to fully
urbanize secession, they will have to take on the status of “homeland” and mobilize
patriotism against the temptations of “exit.” Disney’s Celebration, Florida, is a landmark project here, from its branded mythology to its status as a self-governing city
and county. Elsewhere developers recognize that a fetish for arbitrary distinctions of
hierarchy isn’t a bug but a feature, and so at The Oaks, north of Los Angeles, residents
who pass through one gate from the outside world still are excluded from the gated
community inside the gated community, known as The Estates of The Oaks. In dense
cities, enclaves are more vertical than horizontal and branded according to discreet
(and discrete) address coordinates. In New York, One57 (Christian de Portzamparc,
architect) and 432 Park Avenue (Rafael Viñoly) towers near Central Park, and 56 Leonard in Tribeca (Herzog & de Meuron) are just a few options. The demos of the modern
city presents certain difficulties not suffered by planners of the orbiting Elysium, however, as evidenced by concern in New York over so-called “poor doors” that would filter
high-income from low-income residents of the same Westside tower, One Riverside
Park. Readers of J. G. Ballard’s novel High Rise (1975) will also note the tendency for
communities that live within the same building envelope, but strongly differentiated
by status, to lurch inexorably toward tribal violence (and hence have a negative impact
on unit resale value across the board).28
In light of this, it is not surprising to see enclave/camp conditions coexisting side
by side and even sharing walls and borders, flipping interiority quickly or very slowly
or not at all. My home university, University of California, San Diego in La Jolla, sits
in the northwestern-most region of the San Diego/Tijuana metroplex, which is for
many purposes a single city that happens to be bifurcated by an international border.
A strategy of militarized luxury urbanism also has strong appeal to the affluent of Latin
American cities in which violence is an everyday worry. For example, in San Salvador,
“wealthy Salvadorans can retreat to residential compounds that resemble a militarized
version of a Palm Beach retirement community, complete with golf carts. Behind high
walls and even higher voltage wires, one economist gushed to me: ‘This place has
everything—we never have to go outside!’ For the rest, those who stay and those who
get sent back, gangland drama is a fact of life.”29 But it is not as if the poor do not have
their own megastructure gated communities, with their own special dispositions given
for exceptional enforcement of rules. Consider the Dr. Manuel de la Pila housing block
in Ponce, Puerto Rico, one of hundreds built after World War II:

312

The Stack to Come

When it was first built Dr. Pila was an open community. But early one November morning in
1994, two years after a private firm had taken over its management, three helicopters carrying
national guards and police descended upon the project, officially occupying it. Operation Centurion, popularly known as Mano Dura Contra el Crimen (Strong Arm Against Crime), had dictated
that the largest, presumably most dangerous public housing projects should be gated in order to
reduce crime. Over the course of four years, nearly a quarter of Puerto Rico’s 337 public housing
developments were “rescued” or “occupied,” leading to arrests of residents, the establishment of
police outposts, and the erection of fences to control movement. Dr. Pila became a gated public
housing development.

The opportunity to live behind walls and under armed guard is available anywhere,
it seems. It may even be true that in some circumstances, Users of a city-shaped camp
(its autochthonous refugees), may have their clean water supply turned off if service
fees are overdue.30 What remains persistent, however, is that the mutualizing interiority/exteriority of every enclave/camp condition is reversible, even if movement
between one zone and another and the right of exit is not.31 The geodesign problems
of generalizable secession are now dominated by the artificially narrowed interest of
capital transactions (and transactors) to protect themselves from direct contact with
their own externalities, not by the general interest to seek out viable access to that
capital. This is neither a necessary or conclusive situation, and increasing the delamination of sovereignty from territory and the emergence of computational platform
infrastructures may be both the means and the ends to better alternatives. The impetus
toward secession and an activist stance on platform sovereignty (which are not the
same things) is obviously not limited to building borders and, as this book argues, The
Stack’s delinking of infrastructural systems from place also relinks them again in new
ways. Two operations interweave legacy megacities with the Cloud and allow Interface
layers to spin out new media at multiple scales. A new medium brings new noise and
new noise brings new music. Unlike the zero-sum subdivision of a land behind walls,
requiring Users to vote with their personal presence, the Cloud Polis (in principle) comes
to you wherever you are. Many of those who engineer these platforms are not only well
aware of these architectures of proto-sovereignty; they evangelize them, sometimes
ingeniously, sometimes anxiously, and sometimes idiotically.
Demonstrating all three of these in various measure, venture capitalist Balaji Srinivasan summarized the rationale of secession in his Internet-famous speech “Silicon
Valley’s Ultimate Exit.”32 His address is worth examining for what it clarifies about the
current state of the popular discourse on Cloud Polis, how that discourse is so strikingly inadequate, and how it is received and misunderstood. Srinivasan’s key point was
that as the loci of twentieth-century American power (in governance, media, finance,
entertainment, education, military) are giving way to a new economic system based on
Silicon Valley software, that the old order will inevitably defend its flagging legitimacy
by blaming software macroeconomics for the world’s problems. He argues that the best

The Stack to Come

313

remedy is to allow for “free zones” in which the “world run by Silicon Valley” could be
tried, tested, and demonstrated without interference for all to observe. “We need to run
the experiment, to show what a society run by Silicon Valley looks like without affecting
anyone who wants to live under the Paper Belt,” he implores. The inevitable success of
this new polity will make it obvious that it is the sovereign platform of choice for anyone clear-minded enough to care. For this, he argues, the essential criterion of liberty is
the right to withdraw from unworkable regimes. Without naming the source, he draws
on the thesis of Albert Hirschman’s Exit, Voice and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms,
Organizations, and States (1970), which addresses the remedies available to consumers
and citizens in the face of deteriorating quality of goods and services (including, for
example, a failed or repressive state).33 “Voice” is the right to petition or reform institutions to which one belongs, and “exit” is the right to get up and go, to emigrate, to
change teams, to start anew. Addressing the diverse audience, Srinivasan says, “I would
bet that exit is a reason why half of this audience is alive. Many of us have our ancestors who came from China, Vietnam, Korea, Iran, places where there’s war or famine,
economic basket cases. Exit is something that I believe we need to preserve, and exit is
what this talk is about.” He compares states and Cloud platforms directly and quickly
asks us to evaluate one like the other. “Is the United States the Microsoft of nations?”
he asks an audience for whom Microsoft represents everything old, inflexible, arbitrary,
poorly designed, coercive, monolithic, and unfortunate about large platforms. Just as
progress in the Cloud depends on Users’ ability to opt out of one platform and opt in
to another that provides more robust, trustworthy, and well-designed services, he asks,
doesn’t the same apply to governing platforms called states? Leaving iOS for Android
does not involve navigating the armed guards at the Berlin Wall, or walking across the
Sonoran desert (as of this writing), so why can’t movement between platforms of political sovereignty work the same way? We note that he does not specify the convergence
of Cloud platforms absorbing traditional functions of the state with states rotating and
evolving into Cloud platforms. That convergence may confirm or undermine the argument about the necessary superiority of one form over the other.
The more valuable point he makes (almost offhandedly) is one that does not require
the geographic region of Silicon Valley to redraw lines on the map as such. “That’s the
thing about exit is: you can take as much or as little of it as you want. You don’t have
to actually go and get your own island; you can do the equivalent of dual-booting or
telecommuting. You can opt out, exit at whatever level [emphasis mine] you prefer.”
Especially if we take “level” to correspond strongly or weakly with the layers of The
Stack, he is correct but perhaps not entirely aware of the cascading implications of
this observation. As I discussed at length above, different Users may initiate columns
up and down The Stack from many different positions and will be interpolated by the
geoscopic interests of different Interfaces, will make use of what those interests are able
to Address, will be situated within the interfacial envelopes of a given City, variously

314

The Stack to Come

interiorizing and exteriorizing his location, will be enrolled by one or many competing
Cloud platforms and supporting energy systems of varying interoperability. Different
Users will have different columns available and unavailable to them, by definition,
according to the determinant strength of one of more governing layers activated. The
City layers of Pyongyang and Palo Alto will curtail or enable such very different possibilities for the other layers in The Stack that the City layer may have final leverage over
the others. Or, in a perfectly walled garden, the platform coherence of the Cloud layer
may be so closed and perfected that the Interface, Address, and User layers, are decided
within a very small margin of variance. That is, for any real column up and down The
Stack, there is a range between the strong incorporation of the sovereign operations
of all layers together into complete vertical systems and the strong modularity of the
layers into separate and counterprogrammable components. That range is not equally
distributed to all Users everywhere, and the most important variations may be possible
for some Users but not for others, and so exit is never available equally to and from all
platform Users.
For our geodesign initiative, the important pressure point is that the sovereign operations of any one layer in The Stack are not necessarily reducible to or even interoperable with the others, and so redesigning (reprogramming, relegislating, rearticulating)
the sovereign techniques of those layers can directly affect the others and shift the
relative leverage between them. There is nothing inevitable about any one angle, and
the recombinant logics of Stack platforms allow in principle for the future replacement
and displacement of the machinery of one layer. Further, as the activation of a column
occurs down and up all layers of The Stack from wherever a User may be physically
located, the reformation of the sovereign qualities of any one layer may reverberate up
to Users across the world from and to one another, but because they are located differently, the ultimate effects of that reverberation will not be uniform. As both activate
that reprogrammed layer, one User may be opting out while another may be opting in,
even as their gestures appear identical. What is up for one may be down for the other;
what is exit for one may be entrance for another. As a User initiates multiple columns
over time, even simultaneously, she may be inside the sovereign terms of one version
of one layer (say, a Cloud platform or the apparent geolocation of her IP address) while
simultaneously inside those same layers as the User of another column in another stack.
That is, the political interpolation of the User never finally resolves into the biography
of one single person in the same way that the identity of the citizen did and does. The
management of multiple User identities and political positions is less a psychological
disorder than the politics of everyday life. The design of the terms and norms of that
irresolvable multiplicity is inseparable from the design of the sovereign characteristics
of the Stack layers that mediate it, and in this way the simplistic state-versus-market
metaphysics of mainstream Silicon Valley technolibertarianism rather undersells the
disruptive potential of its own product.

The Stack to Come

315

The trial balloon of an information technology free zone echoes remarks made in
2013 by Google CEO Larry Page during his Google I/O keynote speech, as he wondered
aloud about a “Google Island” where we “set aside a part of the world. … I think as technologists we should have some safe places where we can try out new things and figure
out the effect on society. What’s the effect on people, without having to deploy it to the
whole world.”34 Page compared his speculative temporary autonomous zone to Burning
Man, a city that comes and goes on an annual cycle unlike an actual island, and so of
only limited experimental significance and value. Page’s thought bubble presents more
than few problems, even taken at face value (especially taken at face value). “Without
having to deploy it to the whole world” implies that the island is a society-sized laboratory with all the standard measures in place to isolate and contain contaminants
from entering or exiting.35 Accordingly the test-bed can prototype the ideal software
society within its formal boundary only if that border is enforced by draconian walls
and firewalls. This purified closure would either validate or violate the inspiration for
the island as a project, depending on your motivation. If it is not breached and remains
a vacuum, then the findings will have diminished significance outside the artificially
hermetic environment. If data or some other aspect of the Island microsociety were to
leak out, or some of the outside world to link in, on a regular basis, as happened with
Biosphere 2 in the Arizona desert, then the experimental noninterference would be
breached, to whatever significant or insignificant degree. If breached, then the island
is really just one locus among many others in “the whole world,” one that may layer
experiments one on another in dense concentration, but one that does what it does
in direct (if filtered) relationship with other enclaves and camps. By the measure of
Srinivasan’s admonitions, this is a mixed blessing, as the rarified testing grounds must
still make sense of unprogrammable input from the normal outside, a concession that
may disappoint some purists. On the other hand, his strenuous defense of exit must
apply even to the utopias to which emigrants relocate, not just the ones from which
they originated. People, data, carbon, air, and capital have to be able to leave Google
Island for the principle and narrative to hold true. The only way to have it both ways is
to solve for the closed totality of island and then “deploy it to the whole world,” where
planetary boundaries drawn against outer space may provide the same closure as the
island drawn against the ocean: to the make whole world into “the island.” The inclination toward that information universalism is more familiar to Google’s information
cosmopolitanism project than it is to that of the strong secessionists.
There are other future scenarios to spin out from the leverage of this hypothetical
fissure, and they all may really be a more polite way of describing the present from
the comfort of a slightly off-stage futuristic perspective. If formal Westphalian political
geography is to be further delinked from last-instance sovereignty, we could as easily
imagine (if not as easily implement) a situation in which a state’s services are available to Users anywhere, according to their interests and choices, some determined by

316

The Stack to Come

economic privileges, others by cultural and brand allegiances, others by whether they
are simply a human or not. As Cloud platforms absorb state functions and states realize Cloud platform topologies and methods, The Stack does not necessarily privilege
either in favor of the other. State and Cloud platforms may consolidate their competing and complementary services based on different strategies for protocol lock-in—
some geographic, some constitutional, some by historical legacy, some contractual,
some extractive, some by taxing premiums, some mere convention. For example, we
may draw a scenario in which the European Union (or some quasi-state actor, perhaps
a religious polity or a Cloud platform) offers far more secure and useful digital identity
services than California, so those of us who are now California residents choose to
be part of that platform instead of or as well as being Californians at other layers and
other times, and effectively pay “taxes” to a state other than the one on our passports
according to terms of service. In time, people from different locales might become
more intertwined with the services and political conflicts of the EU than they are of
their home nation, because it is the EU platform that is actually providing them a
preferred secure economic and cultural identity, access to transactions, even education
and other social services. Perhaps someone can choose to live under the EU platform’s
data laws even if they mostly reside in Los Angeles, and perhaps, by the terms of a datatraffic encryption and securitization mutual nonaggression pact among platforms,
no one can (or does) stop them. Perhaps they don’t even give up their US passports,
because doing so wouldn’t really matter. In this scenario, some platform strategies
would rely on interoperability among federated universal networks (maybe Google’s or
maybe not), while others would entertain the advantages and suffer the disadvantages
of closed loops (such as Iran’s continuously pending “Halal Internet”). However, for
our User from California, movement is still restricted. Perhaps the greater state services apparatus in China is part of a transnational bloc that for whatever reasons has
been programmed to prevent interoperation with the EU platform. The walled garden
topography becomes, once again, one of antagonistic fiefdoms and empires, but ones
that are more agnostic as to the latitude and longitude coordinates of Users, citizens,
clients, and members.
The prospect of polities delinking from states, and states from territories, and territories from the consumable image of governing platforms sets in motion other
realignments and liquefactions. Unlike oceans, however, that liquidity does not cover
location with an equal, smooth surface. Does universal mobility always also mean that
economies mobilize against the consequences of their metatransactional externalities
stored in camps, carbon sinks, landfills, and prisons? Some technolibertarian design
fictions draw the conclusion that elective self-exclusion will better guarantee a community comprising only those of the preferred disposition. Freedom is taken to mean
a challenge to the state’s monopoly on walls and borders, seen as offensive to the
principles of personal liberty and mobility, in order that new private walls and borders

The Stack to Come

317

can be developed without the restraints of collective regulation. The economist Robin
Hansen wonders aloud about the impending likelihood of individual human trillionaires, people who have encircled so much monetary wealth that they each control
more than the GDP of any but the top twenty or so nation-states (as of 2015).36 For
Hansen, this development might be welcome because it would allow for a scale of privately sovereign capital previously unknown to highly technological societies, which
could be risked on behalf of globally beneficial megaprojects that would be otherwise
impossible. Yes, perhaps. It may bring instead (or also) psychotic, incestuous autocracies, which generally have a poor track record. For some, the prospects of running the
world through a “Sky Club” suite of sovereign private lounge services may feel like a
tidy substitute for the messy state of things, but Users without the means to purchase
their way in, or whose cognitive labor and attention is deemed not valuable enough
to support adequate platform services, are left exposed to the wilderness beyond the
bad walls.37 Unless it is designed in another direction, this Cloud Polis model may tend
to lead away from a heterogeneity of dynamic alternatives and toward a strongly differentiated hierarchy of lived experiences and isolated economies. That scenario casts
a vast cognitive biomass, heaving and wheezing, clicking on things, with no privacy or
support, curtailed into restricted channels of menial online work, training search and
advertising algorithms with their frustrated queries, naming things, captcha-ing blurry
images until mealtime. In other words, under the terms of this scenario, the differential
capacity of mobility for some is proportional to the immobility of others. For some the
right of “exit” is paired with a right (or ability) of “entrance” to the island platform
of their choosing, whereas for others, “exit” is a dead option because they are denied
“entrance” into the closed enclaves that they would choose if they were allowed. Without entrance, exit is not a right; it is a privilege (or product). When exit becomes a
privilege, one defined by the suppression of entrance, it stops being a philosophical
principle and starts being a weapon.38
What does design learn from this consideration of Cloud feudalism?39 Or, what do
we learn about design by examining the logistics of this numinous demolition derby?
First, violence over the terms and conditions of political geography has moved to society’s interfaces (airports, stations, itinerant websites, terminals, shipping ports, disposable cell phones, buses, embassies, financial hubs, hotels, SIM cards, interactive maps).
The mobilization of what Walter Benjamin called the “constituent” power of extralegal
violence is normally thought to prefer targeting the centers of grounded contiguous
institutions (capitols, towers, obelisks, sacred books, and personas), but instead, we
see another strategic tendency to go after crossroads, points of convergence, dilation,
expansion—interfaces—that are as often diffuse, civilian, urban, and algorithmic. Perhaps this is because the center is now diffused, or because in the interfacial image of
totality, the center is already represented and available anywhere. The uncertainty of
The Stack’s social repercussions are thereby on display. As we evaluate its potential for

318

The Stack to Come

a future geopolitical rotation, we recognize that this is possible only because The Stack
cannot guarantee in advance that its Cloud polities will not degrade into caricature
dystopias (and no one can guarantee that they will). To repeat the point already made,
modernity is an open platform for the design and development of antimodern briefs.
Not only does modernity disembed and reembed traditional social forms, traditional
and fundamentalist social forms also disembed and reembed modernity. It is the proximity and adjacency of premodernist fundamentalist projects with the burrowing ubiquity of hypermodernist platforms that is most telling. It is instructive of what we do not
know: how to describe and theorize this atemporal jumble of projective geographies,
and what happens to states and the guarantees of modern sovereignty when they must
compete to defend so directly for their monopoly on legitimate citizenship? What we
haven’t figured out, haven’t designed, are the appropriate ways for such an assemblage
to compose itself. In the figure of the Cloud Polis we have, as it stands today, no idea
what the terms and limits of a Cloud-based citizenship of the Google Grossraum will
or would entail and curtail: Some amalgam of postsecular cosmopolitanism, agonistic
radical democracy, and rational actor microeconomics, largely driven by intersecting
petabyte at-hand data sets and mutant strains of Abrahamic monotheism? But specifically, what is governance (let alone government) within that amalgamation?40 Working
by subtraction, we can say that it may be neither the annulment of dissensus nor the
wholesale transposition of political will into systems optimization, nor is it the synthesizing the political as a metaphysical operation undertaken perhaps with technology
but never as technology. In the absence of well-drawn alternative futures, the proliferation of unredeemable programs means that the primary positions of utopian dissent
end up being those of the secessionist, the fundamentalist, and the misanthrope. That
is an unsustainable trinity.
As the following section on the City layer-to-come will explore, we are not lacking
utopian visions; we are instead drowning in their surplus. It is increasingly unlikely
that for each and every state, each layer of The Stack would somehow resolve inside of
each national boundary, which would then, as similar units, cooperate in a universal
and global constitutional federal order. “The right of the state” to “control the Internet
inside its borders” is very difficult to enforce when its borders are on the Internet and
are themselves, in one of several ways, outside their own terrestrial geography. Today
this option is nevertheless floated by regimes (some if not most authoritarian) hoping
to fix themselves against the tides, withdrawing into national islands, while disallowing entrance and exit to their own Users and citizens (the state monopoly turns ugliest
when its ability to cohere citizens is challenged and undermined). We assume that
not only is there no conventionally cosmopolitan resolution forthcoming around the
bend but perhaps that there cannot be, and should not be. Isn’t the “state condition”
of software and sovereignty going forward one in which each of us is already claimed

The Stack to Come

319

by multiple jurisdictions at the same time, and in which we already manage multiple
formal claims on our social identities and economic agency? Geodesign must draw on
that entanglement, not problematize it as a “contradiction” to be solved. The outgoing
Secretary of State Clinton was right in this regard: the Cloud polities to come—State into
Cloud platforms and platforms into states—do need new architectures.41
We need to experiment with formalizing the partial “citizenships” already at work
in our multiple User identities, including the rights of the “refugees” that all of us
will be at one time or another, as both state-ful and state-less persons.42 We can
draw some provisional principles; we can choose whom we share our time with but
not whom we share our world with, and so the voice-versus-exit dichotomy is dangerously incomplete as a basic algorithm for platform geopolitics. First, without the
ability to materially design and redesign the systems that we have, “voice” is just
requesting others to take action. “If you can’t open it, you don’t own it,” and while
you can voice all you want, if you can’t redesign it, it’s already at least partially broken
(as they say). User-redesignable systems are both more resilient and more accountable: no “voice” then without also “design.” Second, a right of “exit” without symmetrical rights of “entrance” is an empty promise. The emigrants that Srinivasan
spoke about not only left their home countries, they also entered a new one. If they
had not been able to freely move to, as well as freely move from, the lesson and the
example fall apart. “Exit for all, entrance for some” is a bunker mentality, a sovereign
filtering decision camouflaged as something else. It is not practical or scalable and is
antithetical to the cold, hard optimism of my thesis.43 As a platform politics, it also
goes against the “robustness principle” that John Postel wrote into an early draft of
a TCP/IP specifications document: “Be conservative in what you send, and liberal in
what you accept from others.”44 Lastly, the real futures of our Cloud polities will be
determined by extreme accidents at least as much by the execution of plans, and
the coexistence of opposites as much as by the curation of ideals, and so whereas we
might normally contrast the envisioned “clean future” (2001: A Space Odyssey’s airport
lounges, or Gattaca’s dress code) from the “dirty future” (Blade Runner’s streets of LA,
or Mad Max’s social contract of mayhem) as mutually exclusive, instead they actually
depend on one other, each world drinking the wastewater of the other. It is utopia
and dystopia, both at once. For every Cloud Polis, the reversibility of the utopian and
the dystopian tracks with the reversibility of the enveloping line of interiority and
exteriority. The normalized exception can protect or fight the asymmetries of exit
and entrance whether the Interface’s User intends it or not. As discussed below, this is
true (truer in fact) when the lines and hinges of these reversible enclaves/camps overlap and coexist in volumetric space, in the same project, sharing the same envelope,
in the same City layer. Accordingly, even identifying where exit and entrance take
place is not always easy.45

320

The Stack to Come

71. City Layer to Come: Multiple Utopias and Rough Totality
In the modern tradition, the utopian is bound up with the future and the future with
the utopian.46 As intimated, however, it also spawns the fundamentalist utopian futurepast and the totalitarian future-present, as well as other impulses that sometimes work
without messianism. It does, however, require a kind of imagination—what we might
otherwise call “fiction,” an alternative that is not exactly true or false but is, like all
other models, a simulation of logical intentions. Now today we seem to rely on more
sordid measures and untoward means, apocrypha, apophenia, and the gruesome populism of conspiracy theory. Design is not immune to this, and the City layer of The Stack
may succeed by doubling up again on the actual fictions. In Los Angeles, for example,
the rhetoric of future utopia was part of the official foundational brand of the city,
a city with so much future because it had so little history. Today the city has less an
official utopia than an officially cracked utopia. To speak of the Angeleno condition,
its precipice, in the dystopian vernacular is not a critical stance; it is the party line (or
more precisely, the oscillation between the utopian and the dystopian, back again, over
again, in and out, one through the other, both occupying the same place and plot). The
Tyrell Corporation and Rand Corporation, Reyner Banham and Darby Crash, Squeaky
Fromme and Ryan Seacrest. Joan Didion’s self-driving Google car and Gregory Ain’s
gated community project in Calabasas. Philip K. Dick’s spec screenplay for the Farmville movie, and Rene Daalder and Rem Koolhaas’s 1974 screenplay about computergenerated actors and digital films taking over Hollywood. Diller, Scofidio & Renfro’s
use of proprietary film script analysis and focus group testing algorithms ported into
Grasshopper to simulate crowd flow at the Broad Museum, and blockchain–based digital object identifier infrastructure linking Disney’s DRM copy protection to Prism. Morphosis’s CalTrans building’s second career as the bad guy’s headquarters in every cop
show ever made, perhaps soon dethroned by versions of Apple’s UFO megastructure
headquarters up the coast in Cupertino. Among the many quotable dictums of British
urbanist and science-fiction writer J. G. Ballard, one is “sex times technology equals
the future.” We might modify it slightly, perhaps even without changing its essential
meaning, to political theology times technology equals the utopian catastrophe. Put
differently, even once more, the history of the city is, after Walter Benjamin, bound
to the rhythms of theological and prophetic history, and in the guise of the city, that
prophetic economy becomes both utopian and dystopian at once. For Benjamin, the
persistence of theology is its own revelation, but for my thesis, it is more of a nuisance,
but one with explanatory value nevertheless. The design of political systems in the
here and now (which can extend in variously extreme durations) is, for better and for
worse, often enacted through some politico-theological projection for which real cities
and real societies exist, always in a fallen simulacrum of an eventual ideal. For example, after the beginning of the never-ending and never-not-ending War on Terror, the

The Stack to Come

321

globalization of risk has brought with it an aspirational vision of security as a utopia
of urban interfaces, an image of all urban interfaces in a single governable totality. The
geodesign of the City layer must surpass or evade this program.
Utopia not only depends on futurity; it produces futurity as a space to be described
and filled with peace or war or both. Unlike cities in the real world, utopias are absolute singularities, from a Jerusalem that was the geographic center of the world, to the
island jurisdiction of Thomas More, to Theodor Adorno’s insistence to Ernst Bloch that
the utopian impulse is not that of positive reform, but of complete transformation
of the totality of what is, up to and including the apparent reality of death. On that
last bend sits Fredric Jameson’s quote, repeated often by even those it was meant to
ridicule, that “it is easier to imagine the end of the world than the end of capitalism.”
But is that even still true? Was it less true at the end of 2008 than now, when, after the
storm, we have blithely resumed business as usual and officially wasted a good crisis?
Either way, we are most definitely not lacking in imagined ends—capitalist, critical,
green, securitarian, sacred ends—and it is this surplus (of utopian ends of this or that)
that presents a problem for the City layer. Whatever “end of history” began in 1989 and
supposedly ended in 2001 (or later again in 2008) was in no way an eclipse of utopia, as
some who believe themselves dispassionate pragmatists would have it. The flat earth of
digital globalization was nothing if not intensely utopian in its self-image. Cities were
adorned with a new brotherhood of obelisks marking this new “postutopian” order,
predicated on the cargo cult economics of Bilbao effects and affects and punctuated
by the destruction of the World Trade Center towers in New York City by that utopian
urbanist, Mohamed Atta. His master’s degree in urban planning described the segmentation of Aleppo, Syria, into Islamic and Western zones where immunity of the former
could be protected from the dangers of the latter, as well as his mortification at the
mistreatment of the twin towers of the Gates of Al-Nasr. His utopian security urbanism
was to “sacrifice one set of twin towers to save another.”47 This is the problem with a
surplus of utopian ends.
What holds for our City layer’s urbanism proper? Real progress in design tends to
occur in response to an emergency, often a war. Recently design has been asked to
choose between two metaemergencies: ecological deterioration and securitization/the
War on Terror. Lines are drawn. Use cases are modeled. Budgets are allocated. And now
a third, the financial crisis, adds another metaemergency/productive constraint condition against which design can push. The three work in combination and in competition
for prioritization, and through them, constraint is not only a set of conditions in which
design must struggle; to constrain is itself the design strategy. Already these first two
crises, among others, turn our attention to urban interfaces, physical and virtual both,
as the critical design points. The realities of climatic, ecological, natural, and energy
economies as enabling limits on urban systems stage every point within that system as
a transference to be interrogated, subtracted, or optimized. For security, the permanent

322

The Stack to Come

emergency of potential exceptional violence recasts every partition, aperture, orifice,
choke point as a site of discipline for the generalized interior and the immunity of the
aggregate urban body. The utopia of security might even be defined exactly as the aspirational notion that the polymorphous (and polyspatial and polytemporal) interfaces
of the city can be known and governed in total and as a resolved totality through total
images and image instruments. So again, for the normalized exception and the reversible interfacial envelope, it is not the utopian versus the realist but an effluent of multiple utopias, of open utopias and closed utopias, fully operational and co-occupying
the same location, totalities on top of totalities. For the City layer, we see that this
interlacing of utopias, one involving the other, even through the medium of a single
architectural or urban form, as defining its lurches into the future.
Examples are not difficult to collect. Lashkar-e-Taiba’s attacks on Mumbai are already
one illustration of this. The utopian urbanism of this Pakistani state within a state may
be based on an expansive geographical vision of Dar al-Islam, whereas the cosmopolitan logic of Google and Google Earth is a singular denuded space into which competing
claims can be enveloped. The platform utopia of Google Earth’s cosmographic capacities are instrumentalized by fundamentalist politico-theological geographies, such that
one space can interweave through the other in the same projection. And again, their
interweaving and interdependency produce the space of their encounter (once more,
the lesson is less that jihad can fit within Google Earth but than Google Earth fits
within jihad). The space of this interlacing of utopias is made and thereby entered into,
not entered into and so made, or again, after Adorno, “but in that we travel there, the
island of utopia rises out of the sea.” But this doubling is also the work of emergent
platforms, fundamentalist or futurist. In everyday urban design, we see forms based on
both openness and closedness at once, often rendered into the official symbolism of
the state. While the George W. Bush–era US embassy in Berlin by Moore Ruble Yudell
(though it looks like Halliburton’s design) didn’t bother even to suggest civil space or
civilian purpose, some others do. Consider Kieran and Timberlake’s winning design for
the US embassy in London, one quickly derided for its schizophrenic posture to the
world, both transparent glass and defensive bunker at once. It may be a confused compromise of contemporary cliché and contradictory programmatic requirements, or it
may be a perfectly tuned ambivalent and affectless posture for what global architectural
presence even means to the Obama era. Similarly, for Morphosis’s Los Angeles CalTrans
building, dynamic expressionistic forms look like public sculpture but perform as martial security program: decorative camouflage precisely. It is ostensibly an open, green
democratic building in which the virtue of architectural innovation and artistry is on
display for public edification. The building’s footprint is defined in relation to post–
Oklahoma City Bombing guidelines against vehicular proximity, a gigantic concrete
skirt opening only along one corner, where pedestrians encounter outsized expressionistic metal fingers as they try to enter. Housing the higher administrative functions of

The Stack to Come

323

California’s network of roads and freeways, it is not without reason that the CalTrans
headquarters is a kind of fortress, but it does not really look like one exactly. It looks
like irreverent sculpture, but it is in fact the whimsical artistic sculptural elements that
also are the defensive techniques in play and at work. The building’s architect, Thom
Mayne, and I once discussed this, and the irony is not lost on him that one key function
of the expressionist gestures of the LA School is now to serve as security programming.
This displacement is by no means limited to this kind of design. In this nervous selfcontradiction, the urban public body is redefined by its supposed relation to imminent
violence by extrastate actors, but with design flair and ingenuity. It is another mode
of the paranoid style in American spatial politics, one for which urbanism’s primary
use cases are always, on the one hand, the tax-paying citizen who may actually also be
suicide bomber and, on the other, the symbolism of a responsible and transparent institution held up and out of unauthorized reach. Attempts to reconcile the performative
and symbolic demands of security and the open society within the same architectonic
entity, whether a building or a park or a city, means interweaving openness and closedness into a complicated pattern of open and shut, bulletproof glass that makes building skin transparent, massive car bomb deterrents as public art in pedestrian plazas,
evacuation corridors that link floors with sculptural public walkways that also sort and
filter crowds into firewalled zones in case of emergency, and more. This combination of
Enlightenment transparency of publics and gated bunker with weaponized interfaces
is a special design solution that we could call a glass fort. The combination of apparent
opposites into adjacent fabrics and into a single form is one version of what reversible
political boundaries and interiors collapsing on themselves—the normalized exception
of the reversible interface—look like as a design language. Its utopian enclave is less
Elysium than executive lounge membership check-in protocol, and its dystopia is less
the vast pens of Agamben’s canonical camp , and more the furtive moments of political
exception, sandwiched between moments of generalized mobility, like the ten minutes
spent in airport security lines.
While we can interpret the political complications that give rise to these forms, we
are less certain of their ultimate effects, even as we get used to them. The securitarian
utopia of total interfacial visualization works at the scale of the individual building or
city because it also works at the scale of subdivided states and jurisdictions, especially
when its ability to separate one from the other is mostly legal and symbolic. The border, like any other interface, activates as much energy and information as it cleaves
and suppresses, and while there are persistent calls to finalize a West Bank–style total
wedge between the United States and Mexico, from the Pacific to the Gulf, the utopian
securitization that motivates this is not possible. The border economy is so deeply and
thoroughly interdependent (money, goods, labor, people, data, water, food) that to tilt
toward their final disentanglement by strong sorting is a fantasy. Instead the emergent
flow of day-to-day networking continually overwhelms the zombie jurisdictions of this

324

The Stack to Come

prophylactic geopolitics. On the other side of the world, Jerusalem itself is in many
ways archetypical of this sort of designing against regional intracontamination. The
physical city materializes the sacred maps of three major religions, one layered on top
of another, one woven through another, history and prophetic future differentially
activated for Jews, Muslims, and Christians. These exist also in the imaginary architectures of rebuilt temples, original foundations, polydimensional boundaries and land
rights codes, and of course a real wedge introducing an artificial canal, torturing the
limits of legitimate jurisdictionally past their breaking point. But the boundary of this
theocratic enclave/camp economy is not only at the external membrane of official
Israeli territory. Like the international borders held deep within landlocked airports
nowhere near another country, the checkpoints that dot the political border, marking interior from exterior, are repeated again and again inside Jerusalem proper. These
external-but-internal checkpoints multiply the border interface, absorbing it into the
interfaces of everyday life and folding the civil war of Abrahamic monotheism into
their programming. Finally, as their association is concretized in the governed interfaces of mutual immunization, it is also no clearer where the secular economy is predicated on theocratic military segmentation, and where theocratic military segmentation
is built on the secular economy.
“Imagine no lines” is the manifesto of security experts, as in no frontlines to definitely situate war and no clear interior demarcated by exterior membrane. This infinite
smoothing is perhaps another name for what Schmitt called total war and Virilio called
pure war. It is in effect the same thing as “imagine nothing but lines” where the infinity of smoothness proves on closer inspection to be infinite striation. The reversibility
of the line and the no line is expressed in the reversibility of the open and the closed
within the same architecture, the line that draws the enclave that flips into the line that
draws the camp. Just as for the embassies, the paired demands of open and transparent
urbanity and the megastructure-under-siege, democratic and martial, co-occupying the
same structure and the same architecture, less juxtaposed than twisted one within the
other, never dissolve into the same solution. So for The Stack, this leaves more questions. Does the surplus of utopias prevent political will from acting on a planetary level
precisely because it sublimates so much energy into the realm of the imaginary, leaving
us to conquer only fantastic worlds? Are these dreamworld fragments recuperable? If
romanticism is foremost the will to lost unity, and utopia the will to potential totality,
can there be an antiromantic utopianism? A catastrophe without melancholy? For the
geodesign we most need, can there be a true plurality of utopias, not a totality of the
multiple, but like real cities, a multiple of totalities?
It would seem that the positive answers to these questions point away from Security (with a capital S) as the sovereign utopian imaginary for which all governance
becomes a subset of policing. It does not, however, bend away from governance per
se (and from the design of governance). An urban interfacial regime constitutes and

The Stack to Come

325

mediates power, and this is why it is worth designing at all. The unromantic and
unmelancholic utopian impulse as a conceptual driver for urban futures (whatever
direction that might lead) may or may not involve the politicization of this difference
between securitization and the programmatic interests of another geodesign framework. Just as civil technologies can and do have martial qualities and consequences
regardless of whether militaries or paramilitaries ever touch them, so too can explicitly military technologies have civil purpose that goes beyond, or even altogether
evades, their instrumentality for violence or how that violence would have designated
the city. In fact, the city itself, the primordial bunker on the horizon or the boulevard turned into battleground, is perhaps the exemplary technology for the oscillation between military and civilian deployments. We already say all too readily that
violent irruptions within the City represent failures in the governance of interfaces.
Any architecture not only symbolizes power; it also mediates it directly, even constitutes it. One core weakness of securitization as the design driver of urban interfacial
systems is its consistent tendency to enact greater violence onto the city that it is
ostensibly protecting than the dangers it defends against is ever likely to bring. As
perhaps our single most important form of technology, the City suffers from a kind
of autoimmune disorder by which we disfigure them in advance of potential future
disfiguring; we attack them with defensive measures in the inverted image of a potential threat of future criminal or terrorist attack. This is designing for the emergency (as
discussed in the Earth layer chapter, and not on behalf of the emergent) by preemptively repeating the possibility of the catastrophic violence before it actually occurs.
That eventual violence may or may not come, and now it does not even need to come
because its disfiguring plot has already been accomplished by security engineers. By
way of precedent, consider that for the entirety of the Cold War, the United States
and the Soviet Union did not explode a single nuclear device on the enemy’s territory.
Instead, in the guise of the test, the United States bombed the United States (over
1,000 bomb tests, over 300 of them atmospheric, in Nevada, Alaska, Colorado, Mississippi, New Mexico, the Marshall Islands, and elsewhere, for a total of 174 megatons)
and the Soviet Union bombed the Soviet Union (700 to 900 bombs, in Kazakhstan,
Arctic archipelagos, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and other areas of Russia proper, including the Tsar Bomba in 1961—50 megatons all by itself, or ten times the total munitions of World War II, for a total of 285 megatons). By comparison, the bombs that
were used in a war on an external enemy, on Hiroshima and Nagasaki by the United
States, were 15 and 20 kilotons, respectively. To attack one’s own body, not just to
demonstrate the capacity to attack, but to ward off the possibility of the attack from
occurring in the future by performing the attack over and over again on oneself: this
is pathological, is it not?
Another geodesign problem for the City layer with which we are concerned, then, is
not the protection of indeterminate space from this sort of excessive defense mechanism,

326

The Stack to Come

but the extension and expansion of platforms of openness, not because it would be
nice but because it is necessary to the ultimate goal of robust, designable governance of
urban platforms. This requires a model of the User that is constitutionally diverse and
well tuned to the computationally active urban interfaces in which it is situated. That
model would be guaranteed more by the continuity of urban networks, blending into
planetary boulevards, than by cartographically delineated parliaments. Its potential
depends on the viable universality of whatever base-unit interfaces it can build on, and
whatever intelligent agent, human or nonhuman, of that urban political geography
would engage them. Buttons? Borders? Ballots? Buildings? Still just these interfaces?
One of these becoming another? In the worldliness of migrant labor, migrant capital,
migrant information, migrant cultures, migrant languages, migrant standards of legal
rights and itinerant universalisms, the specific standards of (national) citizenship (jus
sanguinis, “right of blood,” and jus soil, “right of soil”) cannot carry the same guarantee
of determination as they may have under different regimes of relative motility operated
by nations tied to land and states woven to nations. These citizen statuses may be a
matter of life and death for some, but are they still inadequate foundations from which
to scale the model geopolitics of the User going forward. Furthermore, any inadequacy
is measured not only against hypermobility, but against positions of agency no longer
exclusive to humans and the political traditions of humans, occupied by the overlaid
populations of Users and Addresses for whom we now design. Such are the cities, and
the City layer.
The next section deals directly with how essential the Addressing systems that link
all layers of The Stack through ubiquitous but not always universal matrices are to the
geodesign we undertake. They may be seen as planetary-scale megastructures in and of
themselves, naming and mapping physical matter and temporal events at superhuman
scale. Crucially, however, just like the interweaving jurisdictional volumes of The Stack
itself, these systems may overlap one another in different states of alignment. They
may cooperate, they may conflict, and they may be unaware of one another. At the
level of the City, they may be operationalized for Stack-versus-Stack warfare, whereby
one interfacial regime attacks the precisely Addressed object within another Stack, in
another city, perhaps even in such a way that the other Stack is incapable of identifying
and addressing the anomaly. Any one city may contain multiple addressing regimes or
may be exclusive to only one (which may constitute the functional definition of the
interfacial utopia of security: as pure as it is fragile). Differences between the map of
the real (the Interface) and the archive of what is enumerated (the Addressed) are differences not only over a contested ground; they are differences in how to describe, think,
and act on that ground in the first place. Different addressing regimes inform different interfacial regimes, which in turn ground the Cloud differently, over which their
complementary and conflicting platforms contest one another. That is, their holy wars
are not only over naming and enumerating the ground on which the temple might go;

The Stack to Come

327

they are also over the definition of ground in the first place and over specifying into
what currencies it can be converted and circulated.
72. Address Layer to Come: Platform-of-Platforms
Our extended consideration of The Stack is hardly the first time the idea of a computational governance has been considered. From the early twentieth-century science
fiction, to the midcentury rise of IBM and cybernetics, to late-century campaigns to
see the “law as code” and “government as a platform,” it has been a recurring thematic ideal or nightmare, depending on perspective.48 It is curious, then, how poorly
academic political science and international relations have dealt with computation
as an institutional and global force. It is acknowledged as a mechanism available to
statecraft and a sector over which policy is to be developed, but it is not usually considered by these disciplines as a primary seat of authority in its own right. Conversely,
computer science, at least its populist variants, has had little trouble convincing itself
that the social and institutional mechanisms for governing complex software and
hardware systems (e.g., open source collaboration, sovereign user and administration,
clustered APIs) can directly displace older models of public governance without prohibitive difficulty. But the translation between politics and programming is not automatic or inevitable, and indeed their transgenic encounter is occurring in ways that are
often unpremeditated and misunderstood (being therefore the topic of this book). We
observed that new forms of governmentality arise through new capacities to tax flows
(at ports, at gates, on property, on income, on attention, on clicks, on movement, on
electrons, and on carbon, for example). It is not at all clear whether, in the long run,
Cloud platforms will overwhelm state control on such flows, or whether states will continue to evolve into Cloud platforms absorbing the displaced functions back into themselves, or whether both will split or rotate diagonally to one another, or how deeply
what we may now recognize as the surveillance state (United States, China, or others)
will become a universal solvent of compulsory transparency or an opaque monolith of
absolute paranoia, or all of the above, or none of the above.
Between the state, the market, and the platform, which is best designed to tax the
interfaces of everyday life and draw sovereignty thereby? It is a false choice, to be sure,
but one that raises the question of where to locate the proper site of governance as such.
What would we mean by “the public” if not that which is constituted by such interfaces, and where else should “governance”—meant here as the necessary, deliberate,
and enforceable composition of durable political subjects and their mediations—live if
not there? Not in some obtuse chain of parliamentary representation, some delusional
monadic individual unit, or some sad little community consensus powered by moral
hectoring, but instead in the immanent, immediate, and exactly present interfaces
that cleave and bind us. Where should sovereignty reside if not in what is in between

328

The Stack to Come

us, and derived not from each of us individually but by what draws the world through
us? For this, it’s critical to underscore that Cloud platforms (including sometimes state
apparatuses) are exactly that: platforms. It is important as well to insist once more that
platforms are not only a technical architecture, but also an institutional form. At once,
they centralize (like states) scaffolding the terms of participation according to rigid but
universal protocols, just as they decentralize (like markets) coordinating economies
not through the superimposition of fixed plans but through interoperable and emergent interaction. Next to states and markets, platforms are a third form, coordinating through fixed protocols while scattering free-range Users watched over in loving if
also disconcertingly omniscient grace. The platform as totality draws the interfaces of
everyday life into one another, again, where the maximal state and the minimal state,
“Red Plenty” and “Google Gosplan,” start to look weirdly similar. From this, our own
subjective enrollment in them is less as citizens of polis or as homo economicus within a
market, but positioned rather as Users of a platform. As I see it, the future work of geopolitical theory (and of design and geopolitics) includes the development of a proper
history, typology, and program for such platforms. These would not be a shorthand for
Cloud feudalism (or for the monotonic network politics of the “multitude”) but models
for the organization of durable alter-totalities that command the force of law, if not
necessarily its forms and formality. Our understanding of the political and economic
philosophy of platforms demands its own Hobbes, Marx, Hayek, and Keynes—but until
then, only a few broad strokes or, a field of dots that may provoke other inspired line
drawers to connect them in ingenious ways.
In the “platforms” section of the first chapter, I briefly discussed the history of
centralized cybernetic economic planning programs, including during the 1950s and
1960s in the former Soviet Union, under the supervision of many, including especially
mathematician Leonid Kantorovich, as well as the Cybersin initiative, undertaken in
the early years of Salvador Allende’s rule in Chile, as designed by British cybernetician Stafford Beer. Abstracted from the politics of their host nations, the Soviet Union
and Allende’s Chile, there has been renewed interest in the sometimes tragic stories
of these primordial computational economies that place them both on the shelf with
other wistfully unrealized past utopias, as well as a more pragmatic interest in properly
constructing a history of the present and perhaps to discover overlooked and highly
relevant accomplishments, both technological and economic.49 As part of a cyberleftist archaeology, these projects are included among Nikolai Federov’s “Cosmism”;
Alexander Bogdanov’s revolutionary-era proto-systems theory, Tektology, and Red Star,
his science-fiction novel about a socialist utopia on Mars; Konstantin Tsiolkovsky’s
involvement with Kosma Vojagho; Pavel Klushantsev’s space exploration films, even
Marcuse’s speculations on automation and the end of scarcity; and any number of other
interfaces between science fiction and speculative communistic futurism.50 At the same
time, in their matching of totalities, and of computational systems with economic and

The Stack to Come

329

territorial totalities, they are also part of a larger genealogy that includes, on the one
hand, the modernist design value for the rational manufacturing and distribution of a
universal baseline of material goods based on the most advanced available chemistry
and calculations, and on the another, capitalist platforms for economic governance,
such as simulating markets, calculating optimal prices, futures modeling, consumer
profiling, and logistical optimization. Liberal technocracy has its own (sometimes overlapping) utopian archaeology. As we’ll see from the perspective of the platform looking
out at the economies it is being asked to compose, the differences between state and
market planning are far less dichotomous than they may appear from perspectives looking in. In the 1960s, programmers tried to use available computing capacity (incredibly
limited by today’s standards) to implement the multifactoral calculations demanded by
Gosplans, the State Board for Planning, that supervised the Soviet five-year plans. They
were attempting to rationalize through planned centralization the supposedly spontaneous pricing computations of the market—what Hayek called catallaxy. For Hayek, a
market is itself a distributed computer of sorts that will always have better information
with which to work because calculations happen at the very end-points of the network,
within individual transactions and on their cascading pressure on aggregate supply. To
the socialist cyberneticians, the market’s transactional calculations would always be
fatally inefficient because they are driven not by the optimal distribution of goods and
value but by the tactical extraction of profit, always providing a price that is a distorted
reflection of that surplus and not the need fulfilled (among other reasons, of course).
These are caricatures of real economic mechanisms that are always anything but pristine, but the terms of abstracted oppositions posed here are useful in that they may
clarify what is most important about the platform economies that straddle both types.
Platforms locate the signal processing of pricing intelligence in both central mechanisms and in the indeterminate activities of Users, whose behavior may be modeled in
advance but is not legally fixed to the dictates of that model (we hope). Furthermore,
the functional difference between goods provided without profit by public utilities
versus goods provided at or near zero-marginal cost by quasi-private platforms suggests
a paradoxical alignment between the absolutization of monetary signification and its
practical obsolescence (more on this below). A centralized system may be based on
input-output models that are agnostic as to exchange value of goods and are therefore
able to include the entire life cycle of resources in their models of economic activity,
in principle if not in practice, but historically have been crippled by the slow feedback
of demand signals back into those models. For expenditures with a long duration and
widely shared return on investment, such as building a bridge, this slow relay is not
such a problem, and most likely an advantage. Market governance works by building
aggregate systems out of the emergent intelligence of zillions of individual transitions,
including the distributed planning and forecasting of commodities and futures, and in
doing so, they can have difficulty modeling totalities with long durations, especially

330

The Stack to Come

ones composed of resources with tremendous value but no explicit price, such as a rainforest (or perhaps a bridge), and which therefore can be excluded as “externalities.”51
(Again to preempt criticism from economists and ideologues alike, I grant that my
treatment of these is artificially reductionist. They are meant to diagram a dynamic of
convergence between what are conventionally understood as polar opposing tendencies into platforms, shown as technical-institutional systems that combine aspects of
both and perhaps the ascendant infrastructural typology for contemporary planetaryscale computation.) Of particular interest is when very large-scale market actors also
take on the governing role of central planning of the vast numbers of transactions that
they engage in and enable. Problems of asymmetries of information between market
actors engaged in a transactions are well known and in many respects presumed as
part of a regularized cycle of buyers and sellers turning into winners and losers. However, when the sheer scale of one actor also allows it extraordinary omniscience and
influence over the very possibility of a transaction, perhaps even by controlling the
determining signals of prices already in advance of any impact they may have on any
“open” transaction, then a form of governance is discerned. For example, the platform
scale of Walmart and Amazon allows them line-of-sight into the supply chains that is
so comprehensive, from the raw materials on which their suppliers depend through to
the tastes of individual Users, that they can set wholesale prices (and wages) at skinthin margins because they know more about their suppliers’ bottom-line costs than
their suppliers do. This is one aspect of how platforms can manage a kind of synthetic
catallaxy.
Before discussing the key difference between these two platform actors, one from
Arkansas and one from Seattle, we should first quickly revisit Jameson’s infamous
consideration of “Walmart as Utopia” (perhaps in light of Lenin’s celebration of
monopoly). On the one hand, Jameson sees the incredible accomplishments of this
most rapacious of capitalist organisms: keeping prices low enough that lower-income
shoppers can afford a diverse range of standardized goods modeled to satisfy standardized desires, driving logistical and production innovations and with them rationalizing the deep chemistry of industrial production in ways that would have seemed
impossibly attractive to the early modernists, and many others. He writes, “So it is that
Wal-Mart is celebrated as the ultimate in democracy as well as in efficiency: streamlined organization that ruthlessly strips away all unnecessary frills and waste and that
disciplines its bureaucracy into a class as admirable as the Prussian state or the great
movement of instituteurs in the late nineteenth-century French lay education, or even
the dreams of a streamlined Soviet system. New desires are encouraged and satisfied
as richly as the theoreticians of the 1960s (and also Marx himself) predicted, and the
problems of distribution are triumphantly addressed in all kinds of new technological
innovations.” At the same time, this extraordinary logistical accomplishment comes at
equally extraordinary costs. Jameson continues, “This dialectical character of the new

The Stack to Come

331

reality Wal-Mart represents is also very much the source of the ambivalence universally felt about this business operation, whose capacity to reduce inflation and to hold
down or even lower prices and to make life affordable for the poorest Americans is also
the very source of their poverty and the prime mover in the dissolution of American
industrial productivity and the irrevocable destruction of the American small town.”
In other words Walmart’s relentless synthetic pricing and production megastructure
allows the working poor to afford a diverse collection of commodities from roughly
11,000 stores in twenty-seven countries, but at the expense of keeping them poor.
Walmart is known to pay wages so low that many full-time employees may receive
regular government assistance just to survive, effectively treating marginal labor costs
as an externality and outsourcing them to the state as just another manipulated supplier, and all the while realizing global net profits of over $17 billion. A platform actor
of this scale could exercise its sovereign influence to radically restructure and improve
production and labor conditions, but largely does not do so at the scale of need and
opportunity.52 Perhaps in an alternate universe (or year to come), Bizarro Walmart will
exercise its ubiquity toward another and better Cloud Polis. Amazon’s total revenue is
still a fraction of Walmart’s but it is all e-commerce, a domain in which Walmart still
struggles for various reasons, but obviously where the long-term growth in retail will be
realized.53 By comparison, and to the ongoing chagrin of some of its investors, Amazon
regularly loses hundreds of millions of dollars a year, with revenues well below the cost
of its operations and aggressive infrastructure expansion.54 What is the proper name for
this kind of platform actor? Forget your associations with “Amazon” as real brand and
company and imagine something as yet unnamed that does the following: it aggregates the most comprehensive catalogue of commodities ever enumerated; provides
supply chain omniscience, a comprehensive synthetic catallaxy that is arguably rivaled
only by Walmart or Google (among remotely similar companies); uses this leverage to
lower unit costs by deflationary degrees each year; introduces its own proprietary unit
addressing system; innovates the use of robotic warehousing processes to distribute
objects with a minimum of physical intermediation; and does so at global scale without making a profit. Public utility? Monopoly? Neoliberal deterritorialization incarnate? Object-oriented Cloud feudalism? What would have the mid-1960s engineers of
Red Plenty have called it?55
There is a joke (now an old joke) that goes like this, “Question: What is the most
significant accomplishment of communism? Answer: The Apollo Space Program.” The
implication is that state communism not only accomplished nothing with the violent upheavals of its misguided and self-corrupted effort at building egalitarian society
from scratch, except by way of stimulating market-based societies to greater heights
in response. It’s not my interest to revisit or revitalize Cold War ideologies (or evangelize twentieth-century economic ideologies, as should be clear by now) and so will
offer instead an update and correction of this joke.56 The most significant indirect

332

The Stack to Come

contribution was not Apollo; rather it was Google. Is that still even a joke? The PageRank algorithm that formed the initial core of Search was based on “collective evaluation” as opposed to expert evaluation, which would be more expensive, slower and
less reliable when dealing with massive amounts of unstructured and dynamic data. As
described by Massimo Franceschet in his article “PageRank: Standing on the Shoulders
of Giants,” which locates Google’s algorithmic methods in the long and diverse history
of econometric, sociometric, and bibliometric information evaluation and calculative
techniques, “PageRank introduced an original notion of quality of information found
on the Web: the collective intelligence of the Web, formed by the opinions of the millions of people that populate this universe, is exploited to determine the importance,
and ultimately the quality, of that information.” This too is synthetic catallaxy, the
real-time weighing of the value of information within a differential field too large for
any one actor to envision or evaluate, let alone steer. But instead of this system taking
place “spontaneously” and for the purpose of realizing profit by one side of incremental transactions (there is no buyer or seller—yet), it is done through the unilateral
centralization of decision-making algorithms into a single governing computational
platform. For Google, that is itself an incipient intelligence as taught by its Users, is
guided by the cosmic vocation “to organize the world’s information and to make it
universally accessible and useful” and to do all this at a unit transactional price of
zero and for half the planet at once. Again, what would have the engineers of Red
Plenty have called this?57 Perhaps they would call it “my employer”? The genealogy of
a project as complex as Google is much more twisty than any straight line from 1958
to 1968 to 1998, but it is impossible to understand the Google variant of Cloud Polis,
and the accomplishment of engineering a freely available, global-scale econometric
infrastructure, let alone the impetus to do so without also understanding the design
ambitions of socialist/ communist cybernetics for a universal platform-of-platforms
that produces nothing on its own but would optimize everything to everyone.58 By
some Gordian knot in political-economic history, among the most important contemporary accomplishments of capitalism is a descendant flower from the rubble of communism, our beloved and feared Google Gosplan (NASDAQ: GOOG). Perhaps—it is as
yet to be determined—the inverse may also be true, and an ultimate consequence of
Google’s platform universality will be an economic and informational social apparatus
that bypasses the pricing and planning deficiencies of twentieth-century economic
doctrines. In some variants of Marxian theory, it is an article of faith that socialism
will emerge once capitalism has perfected technological systems to a degree that competitive ownership is unnecessary. In time, so the parable goes, the state itself will give
way and dissolve into the generalized sovereign network of the general intellect. In
the future, once all the information is “made universally accessible and useful,” it is
unknown whether the future descendant(s) of today’s Google Gosplan will also fade
away. “My work here is done,” says the Interface one morning. “OK, Google,” we reply.

The Stack to Come

333

In the meantime, the design dilemmas of algorithmic governance are undecided but
of pressing importance.
The infrastructural determinism of platform economics shifts where politics might
be located and what its compositional limits might be in relation to markets, agora, and
polities is solved differently by different systems. The economic architectures of China,
the United Arab Emirates, Wall Street, and Silicon Valley (for example) all represent different genres of capitalism, differently expressed by similar computational substrates,
enrolling or refusing available layers of The Stack. More important, components of
those architectures are as available without prejudice to geodesign as much as the legacies of red futurism. We are interested in systems that can adjudicate the “socialist pricing problem” (knowing that centralized systems can be too slow to sense and calculate
individual price signals) and as well as the capitalist pricing problem: that market models
can confuse the emergent effects of transaction liquidity with systems planning and do
so at the expense of artificially segregating and suppressing the real costs of near- and
long-term “externalities.” We allow, to the pronounced consternation of both socialist and capitalist realists, that some polypaternal supercomputational descendant of
Google Gosplan might provide a mechanism of projection, response, optimization,
automation, not to mention valuation and accounting, beholden neither to market
idiocracy nor dim bureaucratic inertia, but to the appetite and expression of a curated
algorithmic phyla and its motivated Users. Perhaps to an extent, it already does. As
suggested, such a platform-of-platforms might be idealized as pure governing medium,
creating almost no original content in and of itself, because its fundamental role would
be to interface, sort, and optimize the logistics of physical and virtual value, moving
in and out. Its politics are fought over the naming, archiving, optimizing, disseminating, and recapitalizing what has been or will be produced by User polities that can
possibly be Addressed. Its vision, “seeing like a state,” would be defined by the particular constellation of addressable objects and processes that constitute its world and by
how it gives interfacial narrative to these through binding metadata about its uniquely
cohered archive(s). Now, consider not just one of these universal apparatuses at work,
but several, each interlocking, opposing, or ignoring the others, each social totality of
planetary-scale computation enrolling the whole globe at once, along with the others.
Comparative planetology, we now realize, does not necessarily require going to Mars.59
The calculation problem for centralized plans or decentralized markets or any combination of these depends on the availability of data, which itself depends not only
on the worldly divulgence and figuration of information from signal to sensor, but
on how any platform apparatus is constructed to construe the world as an Addressable
surface in the first place. A old growth redwood falling in a forest is not registered as
a governable signal if the sensing apparatus is ignorant of its existence or relevance. It
is not data until it is made so. Sociology has been aware of the potential and perils of
diagramming the world by immanent statistical self-transparency going back at least to

334

The Stack to Come

Tarde’s Monadology and Sociology (1893).60 Tarde writes, “If statistics continues to progress as it has done for several years, if the information which it gives us continues to
gain in accuracy, in dispatch, in bulk, and in regularity, a time may come when upon
the accomplishment of every social event a figure will at once issue forth automatically, so to speak, to take its place on the statistical registers that will be continuously
communicated to the public and spread abroad pictorially,” and so big data optimism
is born, at least in theory. With the benefit of second-order cybernetics in hindsight,
we understand that the “registration” process is bidirectional, that reporting agents in
such a system both send and receive information to a higher-order governing abstraction. The swarm is measured in relation to how algorithmic governance feeds back to
it, resensing its reactions, and so on. From the opposite perspective of the User looking
to the platform, what may appear as data visualization may prove to be an Interface
allowing delimited access and even control of the platform network and its data, and so
between the edge-and-node visualizing one another, the Interface also becomes a visual
diagram indexing the current state of this multiscalar recursion (at least in principle).
The immediate question to ask on behalf of governance to this idealized cybernetic
flow is where to locate anything like planning. Is the plan still a future model pushing from the center out, or is it now an emergent pricing index pushing from the
periphery in? Neither extreme is really adequate on its own, and so instead we would
focus on how planning and programming, some with the force of law, may be situated at (if not originate from) the Interface layer in the form of the model-simulation.
We hold that the epistemic significance of big data would be realized by their ability
to find and surface utterly alien patterns and relationships among the measured, and
thereby to disturb our doxic conventions, even, and especially when, those interpretations are sensible only to machine Users (more on this below). Unfortunately, to date
these methods seem to more disposed to optimize surgical correlations, confirming
basic presumptions, and delivering high-resolution skeuomorphologies that don’t feel
as fragile as they really are only because everyone else is making queries and visualizing
test data based on the same conceptual conventions.
In the Address chapter, I introduced the notion of “deep address,” an expansive
concept suggesting the identification of objects and events with a granularity that far
surpasses the scales at which humans perceive physical space and duration. We observe
the world as given by the capabilities of binocular vision that can register light between
infrared and ultraviolet wavelengths, memory that can capture and forget events that
happen in seconds or years, and so on. The physical world itself also works much faster
and slower than that, and between nanometric and astronomic magnitudes, there is
much we miss without using microscopes and telescopes. As for all of the things and
events beyond natural perception, the design program of deep address considers how
it is that some as yet unspecifiable means to sense their presence and to identify them
according to a generic addressing matrix, and even to network them one to the other,

The Stack to Come

335

would crack open the world’s information portraiture well beyond the normal scale of
Internet of Things.61 That is, the governable space of deep address is not only limited
by the technological ability to see and sense something but also by the conceptual categorical systems in place that interpret what is seen and sensed as being something worthy of a discrete address or not. As discussed, any governing system, especially those
situated as Cloud Polis, congeals into a functioning governing platform by the combination of these two contingent forms of power and knowledge. The platform sees what it
can, what it is programmed to sense, and it identifies and addresses those perceptions
according to how it is programmed to “think,” seeing what it thinks and thinking what
it sees. At the same time, this is a highly dynamic process and one feeds back into the
other, and any durable platform will evolve according to how and what it thinks about
anomalous signals. The “alien insights” we hope appear from any sufficiently smart
data analysis may begin as entropic noise and in time become foundational typologies
and ontologies. This is where the nomos of the Cloud really works itself out, inch by
inch. As Stewart Elden writes, “Territory should be understood as a political technology,
or perhaps better as a bundle of political technologies. Territory is not simply land, in
the political-economic sense of rights of use, appropriation, and possession attached
to a place; nor is it a narrowly political-strategic question that is closer to a notion of
terrain. Territory comprises techniques for measuring land and controlling terrain.”62
In the near term, before its holy wars kick in, we can plot the Address layer-to-come
by tracing how it works within the forms of algorithmic governance that we already
have. We’ve suggested that the recent financial crisis was also a crisis of addressability in that the kaleidoscopic nesting of asset debt inside collateralized futures inside
options and so on not only allowed contagion to spread without quarantine, but that
the absence of any reliable map of this haunted house of intertextual valuation made
untangling the rot from the flesh all but impossible. The redesign of money—not just
the currency vehicle of exchange, but of the valuation of things and events as such—
may also require, or even entail, a more rigorous, flexible, and intricate mechanism
for the identification of discrete assets as they twist and turn their way through financial wonderlands. What we now call “high-frequency trading” or algorithmic trading
may continue to represent an increasingly larger percentage of all transactions, and as
these techniques become more institutionalized, their methodologies and mechanisms
become more normalized for even long-term investments. At the same time, the ability
for deep address to engender not one but multiple address topologies describing the
same set of events means that the potential for unprosecutable chaos is increased unless
there are some workable standards for financial singularities, bifurcators, and resolvers
that can police these data ontologies. Among the key drivers in the emergence of HFT
were proprietary market simulations with which traders could execute mandated best
prices and which helped inaugurate the supercomputing arms race on Wall Street.63
Money, as we know, signifies not only value but debt, and anthropology confirms that

336

The Stack to Come

debt as a technology of social organization precedes the innovation of material tokens
to measure it. In time, some traditional materials became reference standards, however
unlikely, such as the element Au, a soft, shiny, yellow rock. This option reintroduces
the problems posed by a delimited total amount of value or debt reference, which are
elastic by definition, but which are supposedly equal to the total quantity of that signifying substance. That total may be continually subdivided into units with less and less
value, but the zero-sum economics is guaranteed by the physics of the whole. Moving
off the gold standard increased the scale and granularity of debt to both increase, and
with them the quantitative intensity of the social bonds that debt binds to itself (in
principle at least). It allowed currencies to swell and contract in relation to one another
and to the vagaries of unit value purchasing power, but the indexing of price is not the
same as the indexing of value which is the tabulation of what should be most scarce
within an economy. For example, a carbon tax may help force the real deexternalized costs of carbon to rise, to undistort transaction pricing signals, and in principle
to make its continued overdigestion by ecological sinks prohibitively expensive and
hence scarce by design. This dovetails with the logic of computational megastructures
like Planetary Skin, which would wish to identify, address, and ultimately sort the price
of ecologically sensitive molecules and chemical reactions. Some future permutation of
these sensing apparatuses that is also a kind of banking or insurance infrastructure (and
what are banks and insurers if not also already sensing apparatuses) may turn carbon
itself into the reserve standard against which units of currencies can enumerate debt
and value (including our species’ carbon debt and the value of the ecosystems we have
remaining), or at least a kind of standard conversion currency. If Au has already established that we can link currencies to the table of elements, then why not to C? Would
it do more to ground money in a marking fabrication of total debt that is more relevant
to economies defined by the paradoxes of Anthropocenic growth?
Speaking of reserve currencies, Bitcoin introduces addressable scarcity not in direct
relation to the sum of mined minerals or national currencies, but by the mathematics
of solving increasingly difficult problems toward an eventual arbitrary limit of 21 million “coins.” There is much to explore with Bitcoin, blockchains and related initiatives,
such as Ethereum, but it is also the monetary platform of choice of secessionist projects for which the metaphysical expulsion of externalities is the paramount program,
as important if not more than the disintermediation of central banks. The version of
Bitcoin that we have (other currencies may fork or follow) is exemplary of the futurearchaic quality of many Stack innovations. It is, as Paul Krugman puts it, “both a 17th
century and 21st century currency at once,” a currency mechanism that would freeze
the sum total of possible liquid value tokens in the world, now and forever.64 In this
regard, for certain persuasions, it is better than magic rocks (like gold) because incrementally more gold can always be mined, allowing rootless cosmopolitans to upset
“the natural order” of hierarchical hereditary accumulation. If nothing else, Bitcoin

The Stack to Come

337

has made money into a general design problem, as it should be, and not just the design
of financial products or the look of paper bills, but of vessel abstractions of time, debt,
work, and prestige. Better alternatives are needed soon, before today’s digital platform
currencies are prematurely entrenched in the wrong direction (artificially attenuated to
closure and scarcity of the wrong stuff). Bitcoins also appear not only in mathematical
space but through the energy-intensive mining of coins using special hardware with
names like AntMiner, Minerscube, TerraHash HashCoins, and so on. The math is a
function of the processing power of the servers, which is also a function of the amount
of energy that a server pulls, which for some custom clusters is tremendous. The value
of a single Bitcoin is also then a direct expression of carbon-intensive energy brought to
bear on powering and cooling chips. Perhaps the transparency of that chain of transference, from energy to money, may lead toward even more direct reference to the heat
and carbon at the real bottom of this particular financial stack.
The ultimate granularity of that reference, how it might address and identify value
or debt by trace-routing production and consumption, both physical and conceptual,
is but one fenestration through which deep address enters into the design of Stack
money. In addition to some massive sensing, sorting supercomputational platform
needed to track and pay all this—some terrestrial amalgamation of Planetary Skin,
Google Gosplan, and whatever else—mechanisms are needed to identify every single
instance of economizable matter, action, event, and procedure that can be accounted
for in the first place. The deep and wide adoption of some massively universal, spatially
and temporally expansive addressing schema is required to individuate, nominate, and
enumerate something like Avogadro’s number of instances per person, such that this
absolute accounting of everything might have a map of its own charge. If so, then
solving the capitalist pricing problem becomes practical. While the exaflops might in
theory be available for such a mechanism in the future, its energy costs may be insurmountable, save for quantum computing or some such deliverance—especially if those
costs are themselves priced in reserve currency of network addressable carbon.
73. Interface Layer to Come: Ambient Interface
The voyage stacks space upon space, concrete space upon the space of knowledge, the space of
practical communication upon the former two. It therefore stacks map upon map, world-map
upon world-map, the uniform space of plains and seas, the space of techniques, the space of
knowledges. When the first cycle is exhausted, a second cycle is constituted from it; when the
second is finished, a third, and so forth.
—Michel Serres, “Jules Verne’s Strange Journeys”

The Interface layer may come to situate a new architecture of algorithmic governance
that draws and enforces the conflicts in layers above and below. It may come to absorb

338

The Stack to Come

an automated sovereignty over decisions of inside and outside and deploy it through
the surfaces of everyday computational habitats. How so? It links the User to the other
layers by radically reducing the possible network relations between these sprawling
infrastructures and the individuated agents who may initiate columns up and down,
back and forth. As discussed in the Interface chapter, an interface may take any form
that supports that work of reduction and translation, and today that is it is often the
GUI, through which the User observes and controls things, events, or data. However,
the Interface layer at work for the deep address platforms described may be almost any
object or surface with which a User could conceivably interact and which could then
affect, in principle, any other such object or surface, nearby or far away: instead of
a hyperlink, a true hyperobject.65 These are all ways that something we are comfortable doing might be automated by ubiquitous computation, but the deeper design
program is to allow for other kinds of Users to do other kinds of things that may seem
uncomfortable or even illogical to us today. The pairing of a deep address with ambient
interfaces—the field of interfaces both physical and virtual that surround a User at any
given moment—allows us to imagine a computational solvent imbued into any bit of
matter, providing it with additional intelligence and a universal and/or highly curated
network addressability. As discussed, this would allow “things” that exist at very different physical scales to exchange information and form unusual confederations, with
or without human involvement. It would also imply that either of these could be an
interface allowing a User to point to, control, or play with the other. If a plastic stick in
my hand can be used to control a video game character whose actions are calculated
on a server inside a mountain drawing power from a nearby dam, then many even
more bizarre chains of remote agency and distributed responsibility are possible. This
pile of smart sand could be a haptic interface that precisely guides a robotic surgical
tool inside another person’s body across the ocean as he lies prone, enveloped in the
loving embrace of several twenty-four-axis machine hands and their cushiony little
arms. That cuttlefish changes color in relation to the presence of prey, which causes
its linked avatar, several meters tall, to do the same, which causes the birds to flee just
as a human player of a popular augmented reality (AR) game walks by, ruining his
chances of capturing their fountain for his aligned forces. The factorial combinations
of the chains of interfaciality that are possible go well beyond automating smart home
use cases.
As computation becomes more deeply ubiquitous and the agency of the User is
shared by any addressable thing or event, then for many people, the world may become
an increasingly alien environment in which the privileged position of everyday human
intelligence is shifted off-center. To my thinking, this strongly recommends this program. As discussed in the Interface chapter, one of the chief functions of the GUI’s
reductions is the simplification and narration of all possible interactions to a understandable set of options for the User to easily manage. Long before we achieve anything

The Stack to Come

339

like a deep address hypermaterialism, the design of any sufficiently advanced Internet
of Things infrastructure will have to deal with ongoing complexity issues for human
Users and, it is hoped, will do so in ways more imaginative that simple physical skeuomorphisms for which an object “looks like” what it does (i.e., tiny models that are
synced with their full-size counterparts elsewhere, like little tanks on a big war gaming
table). As designers learn to accommodate nonhuman Users, those kinds of correspondences may or may not prove useful, but the basic function of the interface, graphical
or objective, will persist: to reduce the complexity of systems by presenting some selfreferential closure that will allow for directed entry into that system and into how that
system differentiates itself from its own environment.66
Among the essential features of the emerging geopolitics of The Stack is how entire
interfacial regimes cohere not just into functional reductions of complex chains
of interaction, but also into total images of The Stack and of the world as whole,67
and it is from that perception of a totality— an augmented cognition for a synthetic
ontology—that any Cloud Polis draws its authority, and as those totalities multiply, so
do their jurisdictions. A strong interfacial regime prefigures a platform architecture
built of total interfacial images and does so through the repetition of use that coheres
a durable polity in resemblance to the model. As suggested, the process is mutually
constitutive; the representation gives rise to what it describes, on the one hand, and
that polity articulating itself through interfacial systems eventually comes to resemble
those structures of articulation, on the other. The regime’s interfacial images are the
instruments through which their particular diagrammatic description of “what exists”
on other layers of The Stack is directly enacted by its Users. In other words, those circuits of interfacial relay are never only cognitive models of action but establish real
physical links between things and events, and in the cumulative agglomeration of
those traces, they eventually cohere into a higher-order system and are realized as the
physical transformation of the world itself.68 Every totality, every little utopia, may
arise from the correlation and coherence of one or more interfacial regimes evolving to
express itself as an autonomous sovereign platform, as an informal imagined community or an actual nation-state. Each of these platform states may provide the experience
of internal closure and “autonomy” even as they are structurally dependent on other
platforms, including ones against which they may define themselves in opposition
and by double-exposure. Not only is the instrumental coherence of The Stack coordinated by the interfacial regime, that regime becomes for its User the primary means by
which the world itself is made to appear, and through which it is experienced in relation to that appearance. Whatever is assigned an Address by that regime appears may
appear and whatever is not addressed simply does not exist as such. Each regime, and
hence each mature Cloud Polis, state or nonstate, represents a different world of sites,
things, events, processes, valuations, causes, and effects that is internally consistent
for the User. But because it must reduce the world in order to provide that coherency,

340

The Stack to Come

the regime’s mapping is always incomplete; some things are identified as addressable
entities and located in an interactive narrative, and some are not, some are Addressed
as figures and others as ground. No two regimes’ reductions need be alike (or different)
in how they specify a specific element, and nor does anyone need to acknowledge the
existence of any others, though one could also demand some drama of allegiance or
opposition to another regime as part of its worldview (e.g., the ancient DOS versus Mac
schism).69
Where will those regimes get their raw material for this artificial coherency? As Users
go about their days and lives, dragging their phone-shaped homing beacons hither
and yon, they may pass by millions of sensors, each peering out into the world like
a tick waiting for mammal heat. Together they form a cloud of machine sensation,
each listening or looking or feeling or smelling something about the world or about
the Users in the world, or both at once. A sensor may even be a User if it also initiates
columns up and down The Stack from its little perch. With this new infrastructure now
active, the churn of social interactions that so interested Tarde is now not only made
up of human-to-human communication; it is also a din of bodies, machines, and other
chemistries signaling to itself about itself. Human Users are both the subject and object
of this system, sometimes piloting it and sometimes piloted by it. We leave little traces
of ourselves as we march through the sensor cloud, traces of our presence, our attention, our interests, the biological specificity of our person, and the risk and reward that
we represent to the different Cloud polities here “sensing like a state.”70 This stigmergy
of data, like ants communicating by leaving tracks of pheromones, is another way that
human interact with one another indirectly, anonymously, and perhaps unconsciously
as the impact of one User’s presence, her habits, is part of the information that another
User may observe or be observed by when passing along the same route that is accumulating input and output. On the ground, this is where the interfacial regime of a
particular Cloud Polis is formed and is how it guides and frames the worldview of the
embedded User as a visual, graphical interface would.
We see then that Internet of Things operates at the Interface layer in relation with
the specific patterns of Users’ physical movement, gathered up into secondary images,
which then in turn contribute to how other physical interfaces will or will not interact
with a given User and enforce the logics of a given regime. As the User establishes place
through the interfacial lens of possible engagements with a site, the accumulation
of these interfacial events upon events and connections upon connections generates
another scale of interconnection through its own patterns, densities, rules, and durations. The stigmergic currents of clustered groups of people moving though the City
form nodes by the cumulative overlapping and gathering of multiple itineraries around
common interfaces. In order to form, a node requires a heterogeneous field of possible
interfacial sequences, some of which will bind into a specific, meaningful pattern. Like
possible moves on a game board, there must be capacity for a multitude of patterns to

The Stack to Come

341

arise by the addition of new groups and new possible links. That there would be one
pattern and not another is what makes the social reality of one network significant—
its inclusiveness, exclusiveness, duration, centrality—especially to itself. It is here that
all these crisscrosses take on that secondary order of abstraction as an emergent metaimage of all these situated interfacial events and their cybernetic back-and-forth. Ubiquitous computation may be for the most part a nonvisual interfacial array, but it is also
capable of describing itself as an image, even as an image that can govern and design
how that array is recomposed. By design, this image of the nonvisual network can also
govern other interfaces up or down an order of scale such that their use would result in
desired outcomes at the User layer.71 This reflexive cycle of intentions, decisions, sensations, and filters governing the processes to which it refers (and to which it is itself
referred) is another name for algorithmic governance.72
As we outline the long course of platform governance (both with a nomos of the
Cloud and without one) the seat of that governance may be neither in the formal sovereignty of states nor in the headless tournament of markets, but in interfacial couplings
themselves. Platforms govern in and as algorithmic decision-making machines. They
decide what an interface will or won’t do for which User and when. For Agamben, the
sovereign is he who decides on the state of exception and on the internal exception
of the camp (for him, the “nomos of the modern”) but in the more mundane but pervasive decisions made several times a second by the computationally active interfaces
of the User’s world, the decision over the exception and the reversibility of the interior
and exterior is automated. This is the essence of algorithmic governance. In a way, all
machines represent ways that we have learned to automate decision and action (and it
is at this juncture that the edge of “the political” terminates and something else takes
over). Laws are also a way to automate decision; they codify decision into precedent,
norm, and exact interpretation to be followed over and over again according to code.
Laws refer to how interfaces should and should not operate in the future by attempting
to articulate in advance all possible variations according to plan, whereas algorithms
may automate a decision at the exact point where it needs to be made and where it will
affect a User and a User will affect it at the interfacial seam.
In Stanislaw Lem’s Summa Technologica (1964), his treatise on the future of technology (including space travel and things that closely resemble nanotechnology and virtual
reality), the Polish science fiction author warns—with clear fascination—against possible totalitarian perils of cybernetic governance (“Electrocracy”) and what he calls “The
Black Box: The Regulator of the Highest Kind.” In any conflation of legal regulation,
such as a formal statute, with mechanic regulation, such as a thermostat, there always
exists the potential for enforcement to become either dangerously opaque, unavailable to redress, or dangerously stupid, demanding compliance even against the logical
goals of the regulation, or both. In some recent discussions of algorithmic governance,
it has been suggested that such platforms may work best when desired outcomes are

342

The Stack to Come

well known and understood and when system performance can be quickly measured
and finely tuned.73 Instead of dictating every step along the way, stifling improvisation in the face of contingency, the system is free to find its own best means toward
that particular and consensual end. There are, however, at least two problems with
this heuristic. The first is if insufficient care is given to who or what is desiring a particular outcome and how these may be determined in general before they are decided
in the particular by an interfacial regime.74 The second is that platforms often just do
not work this way. As discussed in the first chapter, a “plan” fixes outcomes and may
also fix means, a “bureaucracy” fixes outcomes and means, whereas a platform can
fix means (such as protocols, APIs, data standards) but not the content of outcomes
(“Google does not ‘make’ what you search for”). It sets criteria for outcomes, but not
the outcomes themselves; that is the point of them. The top search result is the one
that algorithms deem the most “relevant,” but it could be anything at all (to the chagrin of large content providers that would wish to foreground their highly leveraged
content assets). That is, the deciding of outcomes is something that happens in the
course of interaction itself and could be a result of the User’s disciplining the algorithm
of automation as much as it is the algorithm delimiting User behavior by what it shows,
hides, allows, or prohibits. The relative symmetry or asymmetry of this interfacial relationship is, of course, situation dependent and is itself decisive.75
Designing the modulation of symmetry and asymmetry between User and system
is much easier written than done, but anticipating some “outcomes” is obviously also
necessary. When a User is providing input through an interface that alters the algorithm that governs that interface, and so also affecting that algorithm by unconsciously
reprogramming it, we say that the balance of interfacial asymmetry tilts toward the
User. When an algorithm is controlling and curtailing User behavior, cognition, desire,
or affect, for example—or, better, when it is producing these things—then we say that
the interfacial asymmetry tilts toward the algorithm. As discussed, sensors are likely
to become at least as predominant mode of interface design as GUI are today, and the
attendant design questions are only beginning to resolve. For one, interaction may
take place by a complete absence of interaction. A smart thermostat, to take a prosaic
example, learns as much about an inhabitant’s space use patterns by when she is not
home as when she is. Her absence and lack of interaction is not an absence of information at all; it is information of absence. To the consternation of suspicious persons,
the “mobile phone” with a CCD (charge-coupled device) absorbing light and a microphone absorbing sound waves is also a sensor, and for it the principle of information
by absence of interaction holds true. One sensor makes use of the information haul
of another, such as an autonomous vehicle that can navigate terrain based on LiDAR
mapping (a portmanteau of “laser” and “radar”), motion detection sensors, and street
maps (among other sensors). Ultimately, as a User experience design problem, the sense
of a device’s relative autonomy and intelligence will be a key criterion in everyday

The Stack to Come

343

HRI (human-robotics interaction) but is a separate issue from the actual autonomy or
dependence of that device. Interfaces may sustain and nudge Users toward systemically optimal interactions, but for The Stack-to-come, the nudging must work both
ways.76 No platform can only anticipate how Users will make use of it. The most basic
principles of infrastuctural resilience dictate that the algorithmic correlation of new
sensed information must be able to reprogram even the most fundamental assumptions of that interfacial regime’s model of governance and how it obligates decisions
of inside from outside. If not, then that platform is a theocracy, and surely there are
far too many theocratic platforms already plotting their ascendance. I hope, however,
that those interfacial regimes will be dissipated by exit, as others are correspondingly
swelled by entrance.
74. User Layer to Come: Inventing Users
The names don’t matter. The biomass does: so much of it, lost. So much new experience, so
much fresh wisdom annihilated by this world of thinking tumors.
—Peter Watts77

For the most part, people would like to believe that the future of The Stack depends
mostly on the geopolitics of the User and that the more human and humane the User
layer becomes, the better resolved the rest of the accidental megastructure. Resolution
at the User layer may prove decisive in some ways, but very different from how one
might expect and perhaps from “human” in any normal sense. The world is still full
of pre-Copernicans, across the political spectrum, and disturbances to human privilege
will continue to invite violent pushback. The status of the User as a political and technological creature will stage much of this conflict to come, and it will draw both our
deepest intelligence and stupidity to the surface.
An early work by Douglas Engelbart from 1960 is “Special Considerations of the
Individual as User, Generator, and Retriever of Information.” Among the considerable
effects for “the individual” of Engelbart’s later work, as one of the key designers of
many of the interfacial systems we today take for granted (he was key contributor to
the design of the mouse, pointer, and pull-down menu, among other techniques), has
been the conflation of the use, generation, and retrieval of information under a single
actor, the User. It is however also an identity that can easily also pluralize the singular
agent into composite groups of users, generators, and retrievers, and it does so not
only by what it allows people to do but by how it sees them as doers. For architectural
space, the singular User is the generic identity of passengers, customers, drivers, shoppers, bench sitters, door-knob turners, the fenced in and the fenced out, and those
cut-and-pasted inhabitants of rendered visualizations.78 For the Cloud, the User is also
the subject created by available means of measurement and discrete identification,

344

The Stack to Come

markup languages, online ID checks, avatars, and click paths, and for the law, the
User may be whoever has a searchable cellular phone on his person, as his person, as
part of his person, or simply in the proximity of his person. As discussed above, the
conventional User-subject’s neutral utilitarianism relates him to homo economicus, but
it is not identical to him; he is defined as much by how technologies delineate him for
their purposes as he, she, or it uses technologies for perceived self-interest. The User is
whatever The Stack senses at its top layer initiating columns up and down with means
and ends in mind. This is where and how User subjectivity opens up beyond the borders of the human, and if all the sensors and bots are included, the clear majority of
Users are already not human or even organic. This rerendering of the human in the
image of the bot, as filtered through microeconomic compulsion, is as a task-solving
sentient agent who will complete tasks for micropayments, just like other Cloud utility
computing services that provide liquid markets of gigaflops.79 The cultural complexities to be negotiated (or to be simply made irrelevant) are uneven and irregular. It is
interesting to note that the transposition of human labor into simple puzzle solving
is taken by some as straightforward market efficiency and not as a transformation of
humans into diminished automatons, whereas other Stack technologies that may ultimately allow for greater individual pleasure and safety are seen as affronts to the dignity of Creation.
I recently heard Joi Ito, director of the MIT Media Lab say, “Google didn’t just design
a self-driving car. They designed a driver.” This focuses attention on the hardware-dataCloud path dynamic that comes into play as the car navigates the City layer, partially
or fully autonomous from human passenger intention. Among the most interesting
features of what we call today the “driverless car” (“horseless carriage”) is how it decenters the agency and authority of the human pilot from the cockpit and disperses it into
ambient networks operating at multiple scales. For some, this is a welcome innovation, and for others, it will prove an unacceptable emasculation or even dehumanization and will be met with violent resistance, and various forms of human-centric
identity politics. Should driverless systems become commonplace at some point in the
near future (uncertain at this point), we might expect considerable policy interest in
preventing legacy human-driven cars from hazarding public roads and killing tens of
thousands of people per year due to human driver error. One can expect pushback as
fervent as it is irrational. There are some affinities with technologies, however fictitious
or bizarre, that are thought to embody the essence of human mastery. Guns and cars
are among these. They are seen to amplify the human, not contaminate it by mediation and hybridization. I would go so far as to predict that there will be a movement to
identify human-driven automobiles as a type of “arms” and that the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution, now used to shield gun owners from obvious liabilities and to protect their sense of personal dominion, will be flown to keep
human beings behind steering wheels.80 Your life may be ended by someone encased in

The Stack to Come

345

a two-ton steel box careening down the asphalt vista trying to prove a point about how
technology will never capture his natural humanity.81
The individuation of populations into single Users is not a technological necessity,
but from the perspective of The Stack looking up, it is an accommodation and a way of
making its own emergent platforms interoperable with the conventions of identity we
have inherited.82 The function of User individuation is as much to accommodate the
cultural logics of human self-identity predicated on naming, autobiography, lineage,
moral self-accounting, and bureaucratic management as it is a real systems requirement. User IDs make it easier to regularize patterns among multiple variables, but they
are a function of the fact that Users understand their interactions with platforms over
time as the accumulation of events that are temporally unique to themselves. Some
people are surprised to learn that many Cloud platforms are not overly interested in
their name and address, only in their actual and predictable behavior. The idea that
their identity could be reduced to what they do instead who they are seems counterintuitive, even insulting. At the same time, interfacial security regimes can demand
highly specific identification of one exact User versus all possible other Users. Access to
secure locations, such as a data center, is controlled by highly demanding interfacial
apertures. In general, a combination of identification criteria must be satisfied, all of
which are effective for identifying human Users but equally effective identifying nonhuman Users as well, and so as in Kafka’s “Before the Law,” all who come before the
door are made equal, but this door will open only for you. This triumvirate of User identity is: “something you know” like a password, or a specific response to a specific question; “something you have” like an identification card, a dongle, key, or specific chip;
and “something you are” like a fingerprint, retina pattern, or other hard-patterned
information. These are the three sides of the triangle that individuates one User from a
population: knowing, having, being. So long as something can know, have, and be, it can
be a User. To some, that may seem unnatural; to me, that looks like universal suffrage.
In order to design more robust transformations at the User layer, it is not enough
to expand the criteria for admission only to who and what counts as a User; it also
demands a shift in how (and indeed if) the User is made to account for the intentions
and effects of every column that he, she, or it initiates. A crash may be put down to
driver error, but from a wider perspective, the entire transportation system collaborates in allowing for the possibility that this error might result in catastrophe. The
preponderance of attention paid to the legal rights of human Users to interact with one
another without regard to “externalities” and largely without governance other than
the carnival of “reputation,” has the secondary effect of diverting energy from these
other two (likely more) important design problems: the representation of nonhuman
Users and the codification of enforceable accountability within a complex composite
technical system. One starting point is to peel apart the User of an interface from the
owner of an interface, as the demands of each may continue to diverge significantly. As

346

The Stack to Come

discussed above in in relation to the ownership or stewardship of data within an Internet of Things ecology, it is not enough to simply say that the legal owner of a device
should have control over its data, and not only because “the” owner is not likely a
single identifiable entity. A sensor may be owned by X and capture data about Y, and
here the former is the owner while the latter is the User, who may also claim durable
rights over what the sensor senses about themselves. The owner can’t possibly own all
that what he knows about everyone, but at the same time that User (person Y) cannot
possibly claim that anything and everything any sensor senses about himself is really a
part of his expanded sovereign person and should remain under his control. The sound
waves disturbed by your voice that my eardrum picks up are as much mine as yours,
and in a world of trillions of sensors, dividing the City layer up into zones of reasonable
privacy and zones where one has no expectation of privacy makes no sense because, if
no other reason, no zone is ever discrete; it is always overlapped and overlapping. In
some cases, we will definitely wish for the interests of the User to trump those of the
owner. As in Cory Doctorow’s example cited in the User layer chapter, someone who
falls behind on the payments for his or her child’s smart ocular implants and has to
choose between a bankruptcy and an ability to see should rightly claim that the needs
of the User, in this case her daughter, trump those of its owner, her bank.83 Whether the
same is true of driverless cars that drive themselves back to the dealer lot, automatically
repossessing themselves from delinquent Users, is less clear. It is precisely this fog, this
gray area the size of the User layer itself, that needs our most concentrated and critical
design attention.84
The assignment of autonomy and culpability (too often conflated) is equally messy.
Some might anticipate a future in which rival Cloud polities will be defined as much
by the real-world violence of their external conflicts as by their internal strategies.
The development of weapons for large-scale infrastructural warfare through complex
viruses is well underway—spy versus spy, algorithm versus algorithm, City layer versus
City layer, and Stack versus Stack—and attracts some of the very best computer scientists to the problem space. In many cases, the strategy is not only to break an enemy’s
servos, it is to weaponize that enemy’s Users “against him,” especially when the User is
unaware of having being weaponized. The zombified personal computer, taken over by
malware acting like a parasitic fungus, is a basic example, but the capacity of unprogrammed Users to wreak havoc on their own platform is almost limitless. In such a case,
is the User or the owner more responsible? He who initiates the column of death or he
who owns its Stack? Surely intention is important, but not from the system’s perspective on its own security. There are only low-risk and high-risk Interfaces and the Users
attached to them. One lesson of this is that just as the diffusion of “responsibility”
into the system cannot lay the blame at the doorstep of the unconscious User position, it cannot be designed around the effable conscious will of the User either. Colonel
Jack Ripper might tap the first domino in order to protect the purity of essence of his

The Stack to Come

347

precious bodily fluids, but even his maniacal self-sovereignty depends on a vast already
existing machinic apparatus that springs into action. The sacralization of individuated privacy through encryption might also seem to guarantee purity of essence and
the sovereignty of the atomized User, but it anonymizes some of the key variables in
the larger human-technological chain of association, activity, and accountability, also
withdrawing them from reasonable adjudication. Instead of containing the impacts of
an exchange within the closed circle of those transacting, it instead makes some agents
invisible to the trace routing of algorithmic governance altogether, thereby automating
the free-rider problem, as well as making everything that transaction externalizes (both
benign and pernicious) invisible even to the Users that spawn them. Out of sight, out
of mind. This kind of tactical anonymization can both overinflate the end User’s sense
of commanding authority over all interactions (an inflation that is both technological
and psychological) and withdraws the User from forums of accountability for the partial costs of his partial agency. It achieves the former by promising the latter.
The overindividuation of User identity in accordance with modern conventions of
political identity can produce both comedy and tragedy. During protests in Maidan
Square in early 2014, the Ukrainian government of then-President Viktor Yanukovych
sent a text message to the phones of many of those gathered that read, “Dear subscriber, you are registered as a participant in a mass disturbance.” This fact should be
obvious to anyone participating in the mass disturbance, but the implied threat that
comes from the sudden revelation that the state knows who she is, or at least her
phone number, is clear, if somewhat pathetic as well. An explicit drawing of sides does
not benefit a weak regime, and the anointment of someone in the square as officially
an enemy of the state would do little to shore up its flagging legitimacy. Furthermore,
the awkward over-individuation of a mass protest that has power only because it is an
emergent crowd, not a coincidental gathering of many Users at one time, must have
provoked more chuckling than cowering. For the future of the User layer, the episode
also dramatizes the mismatch between traditional political individuation versus real
world User/Interface/City layer assemblages when one is clumsily overlaid on top of the
other. Who knows how sophisticated the targeting was or ever would be in a future of
cell proxies, IP spoofing, number forwarding, and urban software (“Dear sensor embedded in a bridge, you have been identified as a protester …”). The mismatch gets more
convoluted when it has to account for the inadvertent interpolation of Users with citizen-like rights, on the one hand, and the unwanted segmentation and surveillance of
individuated Users, on the other. It confuses one with the other because it sees them
both only in relation to how they deviate from an obsolete figure of User as individual
citizen.
A specific design problem for the Interface layer-to-come is this individuation of the
interface itself. By hailing “the” User as a single agent with a single perspective, instead
of an important but partial agency within many larger and small apparatuses at once,

348

The Stack to Come

the placebo identity of a resolved Vitruvian User is not only accommodated; it is reproduced and fortified. What is the better “sovereign unit” of this assembly then? One
wonders if the legal accounting of individuals is even a viable notion when systems
and individuals become indistinguishable from one another. The Stack’s technologies
of the self give enormous weight to formulas that seem to verify the existential discreteness of the individual, diagrammed by biographical quantification and attended to
by single-serving pointing and clicking. This is so even as the technologies of the self
we see at work in (or as, or through) The Stack do what seems to be the exact opposite
of what I am suggesting, and instead give more and more weight to formulas of individuation that seem to verify the existential discreteness of the existential individual
through the diagrammatic quantification of his biography. For the User-to-come, perhaps no door is built only for you, because your being, having, and knowing are never
only yours alone? The door builds you as that which passes or does not, that which
is absorbed by the profile or that which absorbs it. Real infrastructure involves many
actors, some named and some unaccounted for by law or by software but nevertheless active. The interface constructs Users, but it is also constructed by Users, and so to
remake the User-subject is to reform “the door” to better reflect all of what is actually
present and active within any chain of exchange and to institutionalize these as interfaces into new normative systems. To innovate the agency of the User is then not just
to innovate the rights of humans who are Users but also to innovate the agency of the
machines with which the User is embroiled. A User may be anything that can initiate
a column up and down The Stack, but because as any particular thing, human or nonhuman, may step in or out of that position many times over the course of the day we
need to design modes of accountability all the way up and down the line. Only then
can we reasonably expect to design a livable governance of automated decision on the
inside and the outside, who and what goes where, and how to program algorithmic
interfacial governance, all the while attentive to the exceptions that it decides and does
not decide.
Building a better armature for the User-subject position may not seem like the most
pressing design problem, but in many ways, that is exactly what it is. An (only somewhat) unlikely consensus has formed around the structural importance of robotics and
automation and their impact on the macroeconomics of labor and markets. Bets are
placed from both the right and the left that a “zero-marginal cost society” or “fully
automated luxury communism” is built into the future of software-driven globalization. A party line that crosses parties emerges in different versions, blending nanotechnology, industrial robotics, additive manufacturing (3D printing), Internet of Things,
digital replication, biotechnology, and open networks to draw a scenario in which
many physical commodities are rationalized into downloadable streams, and much of
the heavy lifting (and flying) will be done by intelligent quasi- or fully autonomous
machines. We shall have to wait and see, but algorithms and algorithmically intelligent

The Stack to Come

349

hardware are already active Users in our world, and we need to give them their due.
For better or worse, we and they occupy converging niches in a new equilibrium and
its many punctuations. It is with vestigial stupidity that we police the human/animal
divide in the way that we do, and it is equally misguided to insist that computing
machines are “just tools” and not also co-Users along with us. The implications are
both ethical and economic, and the geopolitics of the User must reflect not only how
we want states and platforms to treat human Users, but how we would situate these
ideals within interfacial regimes that are more effectively inclusive and more accurately
representative (never fully—always by reduction) of who and what is interfacing with
whom and what, regardless of species or kingdom.

The Black Stack

75. Angelus Novus Is Gone
To what extent is The Stack, and its stratigraphic model of interlocking and incongruent softwares and sovereignties, an answer to Clinton’s call for alternative geopolitical
architecture—or is it an answer to another, better question? For our secular geodesign,
the blur by which The Stack-we-have becomes The Stack-to-come doesn’t offer any
messianic historical redemption; it is no one’s “coming community.”1 It is not a transcendental diagram into which matters can go to find their proper places; it is only a
machine with which we can configure things and events of very different scales and
duration, and to realize otherwise illegible abstractions now become infrastructure.
Its formal rigidity necessarily multiplies itself, braiding political geography into rough
weaves, giving sanctuary to double agents on a layer-by-layer basis. But one cannot be
pro-blur anymore than one can be pro-Stack (or anti-Stack), and nor can design just
remap one place onto the next, shifting sovereignty from there to here, from state to
individual, from state to corporation, from law to protocol, from institution to network, from land to Cloud. Instead alternative actors, agents, objects, machines, and
ethics will surely come into view and will fill up another diagram with another distributed tension. These aliens both are and are not us. The geopolitics of computation, its
geographies of programmability, recombinancy, extensibility, recursively, and addressability, are not overseen by any one Angelus Novus that could, per Walter Benjamin’s
assignment, make good on history’s knottily kneaded, well-promised catastrophe,
always tearing and folding back on itself as it flies backward. Because of and despite
its utopian timbre, planetary-scale computation may lead to desolation, tyranny, and
destitution, but if it does, then perhaps it is our own fault.
Accidents fold into accidents into accidents, and jurisdictions into jurisdiction
as the geopolitics become more plural, more compulsive, more contradictory, more
composite and polyscalar. The interfacial totalities of our platform states, drawn from
ambient signals of price and risk and faith and fundamentalism, decide sovereignty by
extracting and extruding value from the ties that bind, their polarized multiplicities

352

The Black Stack

shimmering by fractal superimposition. Dual-booting citizens, all of them migrants
in some way, are held in particular postures by algorithmic governance and granted
premiums by firewalls. Nothing, anywhere, can really be “native” anymore2 and perhaps if we were to accomplish nothing more than this, it will have been worthwhile.
See all the hearts and minds rented several times a day to different walled gardens and
perceptual belief systems, and by “the cunning use of flags” everything that is anything is laundered, like Nauru launders passports, Cayman Islands launders money,
and Guantanamo Bay launders people.3 Crypto City-states enjoy protected rights of
religion and speech, but less so the individuals who live for a time inside them, unless
each or all of them are also incorporated in some manner, because when the state is
sovereign, the individual seeks citizenship, but when the market is sovereign, the individual person seeks the status of the corporation. Immigration becomes the panicked
face of climate wars; homelands are invented by the day, week, and month. Exodus
and exile are branded, even at the expense of keeping time zones straight.4 Nongovernmental organizations guarantee basic health insurance according to increasingly
dubious definitions of net neutrality. Artificial intelligences make the deeper historical time of intergenerational governance more culturally acceptable, at least for what
is mutually addressable by all parties, while all that is governed by its accountings
of appearance and disappearance fills landscapes with sovereign interfaces and their
automated decisions.
Synthetic computation shifts what can be sensed, measured, calculated, communicated, or stored and performs feats of organizational cognition at a scale and speed previously unknown. There is a productive and generous cannibalism in this. For some,
the friend-enemy distinction is rationalized by the ambiance of vast indoor airport cities, thousands of them each supporting hundreds of millions of people, most skirted
by lethal security prophylactics.5 Recall that the Biosphere 2 experiment did have
a winner. It was the ants that beat back the cockroaches that made the humans go
insane.6 The lesson is that inside a domed totality, massively distributed single-mindedness may be a better evolutionary adaptation than individuated nuanced thinking,
and so Google charter cities may be drawn more by stigmergic chemical communication than by glassy formal algorithms. Ants organize their war machine by epidermal
secretion and sensation, and our own satellite-dependent relays do as well, staging
the query, the result, the visualization of the result, the metadata about the query,
the call and response. States involve these prostheses and are involved by them; they
are confiscated by their own mechanisms, and for them the interface is very literally
skin. As spaces opened up and closed off by computation are defined not just by what
governance chooses to see and not see, but by what it chooses to sense and not sense,
the distributed naming of what is and is not sensible expresses that epidermal mode
of sovereignty, where securing in place and securing in motion guarantee the field of
relations that anything might enter into. The abstracted granularity of things and the

The Black Stack

353

wetness of their membranes are both preconditions for how they sense the world and
how the world senses them, how they are designed in place, how they are secured and
provide security. In other words, the designability of skin is already also food by other
means, and thereby also the state by other means. For geopolitics within comparative
planetology, chemistry always wins.
The wrestling between geodesign and platform states is also defined by the limiting condition that designable space is never empty and that the precarious world is
always already full. No tabula is ever rasa: the world is filled but never completed,
with no Genesis alibi on call. In this, political geography is less a zero-sum image of
territories to acquire than the design of a substitute totality, which may or may not
be correspondent with the unitotality of any one world image (such as a globe in
space). Already design today is preoccupied with managing the archive of all “content” produced in preceding centuries; we don’t make new things; we innovate on
the archive and index what is already there, moving from “event” to database and
back again. Whereas industrial platforms like Ford and Toyota innovated the manufacture of complex industrial machines from scratch at mass scale, Google’s mission is not to make new raw information per se, but to structure and curate the total
space of all the world’s information—a standing reserve that already exists, however
underformalized—and to manage it within its anti-obelisk of data centers and make
it a medium for reflexive action on the world now rendered as a computational plateau. We rotate from the system of objects to an economy of metadata. If mass mediation and information scarcity once demanded the architecture of formal ideological
systems, now governance is predicated on the differential management of open and
closed data sets, still also realized as animal violence. The care of any archive is one
present moment’s self-accounting toward an unknowable future—an ethics—and a
database is just a particularly active kind of archive, one for which information that
is drawn from the world more easily becomes an instrument for working reflexively
back on it. It’s unclear though if the shift from scarce, sacred texts to overabundant,
instantaneously archivable information still requires the same promise of ethical
completion to motivate and justify our participation and promise toward the future.
We could act as if it does, until we find out.
Across this span, we are confronted with both a surplus of new worlds and a lack
of clear civilizational frontiers, other than those simulated by various senile medievalisms now in ascendance. Can we survive that? Can we address the openings closest at
hand fast enough that they generate new geographies before we can ruin them? The
curation of these dysfunctional archives directs our attention onto geodesign projects
beyond our economic comprehension, because after all, humans have already redesigned the Earth (The Stack is itself a reflection of that dubious accomplishment), and
it took all our capital since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution to do it. The
Anthropocene should represent a shift in our worldview, one fatal to many of the

354

The Black Stack

humanities’ internal monologues, but it is also the broadest cliché, one favored by
business journalists and know-nothing primitivists alike. In just the century of industrialization, or centuries since wide-scale agriculture, we’ve managed such a radical
transformation in life on the planet’s crust—climate change, population growth,
deforestation, ocean acidification, asphaltization, massive extinction, mega-urbanization—that we’ve finally smothered it whole and brought a new geologic era named
after the pervasive and permanent impact of the human genome on the geophysical
profile of the Earth’s crust and atmosphere. The bad news is evidenced by the longer
odds we hang over our own heads, filling markets with promissory notes to extract
and rationalize more natural resources than may actually exist. The good news is that
we know for certain that short-term “geoengineering” is not only possible but in a
way inevitable, but how so? How and by whom does it go, and unfortunately for us
the answer (perhaps) must arrive before we can properly articulate the question. For
the darker scenarios, macroeconomics completes its metamorphosis into ecophagy,
as the discovery of market failures becomes simultaneously the discovery of limits of
planetary sinks (e.g., carbon, heat, waste, entropy, populist politics) and vice versa;
The Stack becomes our dakhma.7 The shared condition, if there is one, is the mutual
unspeakability and unrecognizability that occupies the seat once reserved for Kantian
cosmopolitanism, now just a pre-event reception for a collective death that we will
actually be able to witness and experience. We shuffle along, soggy-footed. For the
brighter scenario, Shanzhai nanotechnologies may save us from the gray goo of the
landfills, putting them back to work, allowing us to make and buy unnamable assemblages with no relation to our needs or wants, forcing the world’s supply chain algorithms to go haywire, not knowing how to model this or that impulse, or what to
stock on shelf interfaces, putting dog food next to hex wrenches with peach syrup
on top, and for this, the logistical absolute would careen toward universal molecular
flux.8 Put another way, The Stack’s infrastructure failure interdependencies include the
provision of secure potable water. While many platform states may exercise monopoly
control over interfacial exception within their gardened walls, they have no monopoly
on monopolies, and so, opt out to where? The Apollo program’s Apollonian planetary
photography may have rendered an eco-calculative interiority, but the outside didn’t
end there on that day; for both left and right politics, that outside was always an illusion of geocentric ideological habits.
Design (in fact, the real subject of this book) here means the structuring of the world
in reaction to an accelerated decay and in projective anticipation of a condition that
is now only the ghostliest of a virtual present tense. This is a design for accommodating (or refusing to accommodate) the post-whatever-is-melting-into-air and prototyping for pre-what-comes-next: a strategic, groping navigation (however helpless) of
the punctuations that bridge between these two. This geodesign—the work of the blur
and for the emergence within the emergency—is the congealing and uncongealing of

The Black Stack

355

the equilibria-that-were from the equilibria-to-come. If so, what enforces design when
“sovereignty and territory increasingly lead separate lives”?9 Lodged here is not just
political design or politically intelligent design, but rather the redesign of the geopolitical, including the possible conclusion to scrap it outright as an operational concept.
While the objectivity of our common planetary position is far more self-evident than
in the eighteenth century when the Treaty of Westphalia was signed, we should also be
far less certain that it can serve as the determining model of metajurisdictional scale. As
platforms grow, they diverge and converge with equal ease, and as regional differences
are absorbed by them, primordial social distinctions are globalized and revitalized by
those very same platforms, just as new forces also appear and evolve from novelty
to norm. These may be constitutive of new social-systemic realities, but only because
they can occupy multiple scales simultaneously, at once subpolitical and suprapolitical.
They seem to sit still for Russian doll jurisdictions and equidistant equatorial-cylindrical projection maps only when we transpose them through filters full of errors. They
are not well described by the partitioning of public from private sectors, of civil from
martial societies, progressive from oppressive policies, or even finally humans from
nonhumans, atoms from bits. In response, our geodesign still draws from (and into)
its specific planetary situatedness, but does so by overwriting itself again and again in
the same space. When there are no single fixed conditions of inclusion and exclusion,
it may not even be proper to refer to its deliverables as territories and geographies as
such. What then? Can planetarity still be at once a cartographic image and a pregnant
machine, both less and more than a single backdrop? We do know that in the interfacial calculability of sensations and events, borders do everything but vanish, but
that in their simultaneous proliferation and dissipation, liquefaction and fortification,
their interfaces become pervasive. If counterterrorism discourse can dare to even say
“imagine no lines,” thinking that “the front” is everywhere, then it is because already
everywhere is skin and geopolitics is epidermal. This makes the design of the conditional
interfacial exception, drawing the interior versus the interior over again many times a
second, into both the icy calculation and the bloody siege for any platform that hopes
to persist for very long.
76. The Stack and Its Others
Ideally, design’s setting of norms is active, not responsive; it should produce more
than it accommodates. What is today most legal and most explicitly protected by
the formal apparatus of law is what may be the most dangerous. Meanwhile many
forms of connection and interfaciality that are technically illegal—or alegal—adapt
to emergent conditions in ways that formal securitarian urbanism could never preprogram, and also represent some of the most secure public policy paths available. In
the repetition as facts on the ground, these translegal forms (software or hardware)

356

The Black Stack

come to take on the force of law, and then just maybe, if urbanists are savvy, these
designate as law, and geography is recompiled and restocked, brick by brick, in their
image. For design, working with alegal interfaces represents a form of constraint and
also a medium for the proliferation or suppression of utopian and dystopian alliances
and enemies. As said, Cambrian lurches forward in design tend to occur in response
to a crisis: that is when design is most wildly inventive because no other option
would be practical (‘lines are drawn. Use cases are modeled. Budgets are allocated’).
And so, in response, deep systemic crises invite three interrelated and apparently
opposing responses: acceleration, inertia and fundamentalism: fight, hide, and flight,
accordingly.10
It bears repeating, especially as we tinker with the comparative planetology business,
that as every technology brings new accidents, so too every accident brings new technologies. For design, planetary-scale computation is both, amplifying industrial modernity toward a ubiquity that is matched in intensity only by its imminent dissolution.
Our experiment—indeed everyone’s experiment for the coming decades—is tied to an
ecologically ubiquitous computing, a gamble that in many ways underpins all others.
The Stack-to-come should tilt the outcome of that impact toward a renewed modernity, but will it—in some configuration of Clouds, objects, tags, Addresses, Interfaces,
sensors, algorithmic phyla—provide the lightness necessary to organize a restorative,
subtractive, resilient modernity, or will its own voracious energy appetite, toxic production footprint, and alienating virtualization finally overwhelm all? Put differently,
where industrialization was a modernity for tabula rasa, today a subtractive modernity
is what curates that world that is always already full. But can it power an interfacial
modernity not of identity and maximalization, but of externality and transference?
Will planetary-scale pervasive computing prove to be, in some guise, the integral media
of real reindustrialization, allowing for light but powerful interfaces of governance and
exchange, or instead, the final, most unsustainable machine consuming the remaining
resources into its subterranean pits? Is it all or nothing? If it can succeed, it is because
its radicality is not drawn from the historical or geographic momentum of a new world,
but rooted in the precarity of globalizations that are as irresolvable as they are interconnected. Either way, we slowly learn to let go of certain things (of nationalisms, of
monotheisms, of economic psychologisms, strong genomic and semiotic ontologies)
and negotiate instead a deliberate and strategic dissolution—on-planet, off-planet—
into whatever and whoever comes next. Somehow I am optimistic, if that is the right
word. The thesis of this particular book is neither a manifesto nor an instruction manual, but as said, a design brief that invites others to collaborate on the articulation and
realization of the renewed modernity described here, with all their deliberate commitment and expert abstraction.11
For that, the prevalent client-side versus the server-side critique of planetary-scale
computational power becomes that much less relevant when it is the interfacial

The Black Stack

357

relays between addressable objects that are the real object of governance, and not the
things themselves. We must assume that more governing pressure on the rights spots
is how to go about geoengineering an economy, and we assume that such pressure
will include how it is that interfaces exact terms of exception. If the reader’s working assumption is, however, that mathematics plus the force of law equals totalitarianism, then I suppose other issues are more pressing for you and your colleagues.12
The geodesign I would describe means an exploration of how certain control systems,
certain platform systems, and specific configurations work toward particular desirable and undesirable governmental effects (“there is no architecture without violence,
because there is no architecture without program”).13 Platforms are emergent systems
that are informed by power. That is why they work (and where they work). As said,
the frame of planetary computation not only houses and distorts multiple jurisdictional claims; it directly produces new strata of jurisdiction where none existed before,
and yet it causes any particular site, in any particular City, to be so layered with jurisdictional image systems that no one of these can ever really resolve into a single consensual sovereign geography. The political experience of the overlayered site is not
only a competition for the right of legitimate force but the dominance of one addressable geography versus another, and often one because the other, hence the irresolvable surplus of utopian total images (“we are millionaires in images of revolution”).14
Writ large, the layered architecture of The Stack makes vertical totality and hence the
strategy of consensus more difficult than within a bounded horizontal encampment
of whatever size and relative secularity. Political spectrums, between authoritarianism
and communization or state and platform, may be different for each layer within the
same Stack, and especially within a real-world column initiated by a real-world User.
A gesture from one User, incorporating all layers on its way down and all layers again
on its way back up again to another User, may pass through a zoo of different captured ideological zones fighting it out layer by layer, interacting with geographies of
every imaginable purity or toxicity along the way, each one spinning to a different
tune.15 That is just the table stakes. From here comes the Promethean fascination with
how intelligent systems, including human societies, evolve on and from this particular planetary perch, and a program to design first in the service of maximum possible
wealth to the maximum possible interactions and intercourses, with prejudice toward
disenchantment and without deference for superstition and sentimentality. Other
alternatives suggest instead worlds of shit and pain. Delay and dissembling will insult
current opportunities for enlightenment, prosperity, and jubilation and will only
encourage the worst scenarios to reach fruition—letting some believe that those were
fulfilled prophecies when they actually required the dour, bewildered participation of
their victims.
In order to build The Stack-to-come, we have to first imagine it in ruins and work
backward from this as both a conclusion and a starting point. History (that is, the

358

The Black Stack

coevolution of carboniferous and noncarboniferous phyla) is already topological
whether we speak of it that way or not, and this is especially true at the local level of
animals and their machines. They build worlds and cities that are variously hard and
soft, at least to their Users, and it is in relation to this stratigraphic variation that some
choose to intuit differences between what we call hardware and software (and between
mechanical and informational machines, even when those differences are only conventions). The Stack-to-come (in ruins) is both hard and soft, shifting its textural profile according to how we compare it to the rest of the physical world, warm or cold, wet
or dry, inside out or outside in. We see this in how the clinamen, as a primordial vision
of universal computation, can accommodate a positive figure-ground image of bits
calculating-in-flight through a void (of computation in the world), but just as well, the
inverse negative image of the world unfolding through calculative subtraction from a
universally “full” totality (of the world as the shadow of computation). Quentin Meillassoux calls this an “‘inverse Epicureanism’, not one of real atoms displacing each
other in a hazardous fashion … in an infinite void, but one of ‘atoms of void’ displacing each other in a hazardous fashion within the infinite plenitude of fluxes. It must
therefore be that disconnection itself is ultimately reduced to the plenitude of heterogeneous flux.”16
Shifting down from mathematics to mere algorithms, this oscillation in perspective
may parallel how we situate artificial planetary-scale computing, such as The Stack,
in relation to the rest of the physical world. The latter is already a “first” planetary
computer on top of which our far less capable synthetic copy has been laid down or,
perhaps it is an intensively organized local manifestation of a general geocomputational evolutionary landscape that could be rendered in silicon or carbon or hydrogen
at different times in different ways. The former might be inclined to see calculation in
or on the world, and the latter to see the world as taking shape through the (negative)
swerve of bits in the first place, and calculation as the world. For one, technology may
or may not affirm the world (even without our having access), and for the other, the
rest of the world sets forth its own machines to access us (who are also—lovingly—real
machines). I wonder then whether this is why machines that rely heavily on software
to achieve their utility are seen as more artificial, as layered onto the real, than those
that work through analogic mechanical operation, which are more likely to be seen as
within the real?17 For me, what is at stake is not philosophy or physics but the means
by which we abstract actual work into intelligence and back again according to ideas
of preferred function and outcomes. As the last starting point, design of the next Stack
must not define itself by a symbolic or operational opposition between the virtual and
the real, or the soft and the hard (or even the thinking and the unthinking). It must
work with both the positive assembly of matter in the void, on the plane and in the
world, and also with the negative maneuver of information as the world, from its form
and through its air.

The Black Stack

359

77. Concluding Remarks on Design and The Black Stack
Designing with and for Stacks means designing at multiple scales simultaneously. Forget User-centered design; we need to design for what comes next, what comes outside, what has already arrived. As said, the pressing issue is the design of Users, which
includes designing a geopolitics of Users that is more sophisticated than the extrusion
of microeconomic privacy into metaphysics. On the ground, sometimes you are the
User of the drone, sometimes the drone is the User of you, and mostly the coagulation of effective agency within a given network is some reverberating combination of
these. Better to design for their mutuality and communication than for their relative
opacity or transparency, because as generic dispositions go, suspicion is tiresome for
everyone but the most vigilant personalities. Still, design needs more and better villains; it needs better complexes and syndromes, a better, more primordial sense of
time—rubbing the clinamen raw, as it were. Functional requirements research may
or may not find for acceleration beyond Earth and Earthiness (including to Mars,
beyond the moon, that dumb homunculus, that planetoid teratoma, broken off dead
twin hanging in space).
In the muck of symbolic interchangeability (art into money into toy into energy
into symbol into .JPG into art into money), the building project needing donors is a
new structure that can give rhythm and shape to the global noise. Its gambit embarks
headlong into the banality of the universal so as to find the coordinates of eclipse,
and the recognition that the end of this world does not mean the end of worlds, but
rather of us, which may be our only means of survival. Humans: we come and go. The
multiplication of exceptions and contradictory normalizations, address upon address
upon address, makes people who seem to be right at hand appear more uncertain and
unprovable the more you try to look straight at them. Look and he is gone; look away
and he appears again: Schrödinger’s pedestrian. This is what it means to see clearly
into plastic futures markets where the same droning monotone voice recognized by
psychiatrists as a symptom of homicidal psychosis narrates the boredom overhanging contemporary design culture. The thinking is muddled. Even if all markets are
futures markets, we know that it may not be possible to prioritize and weigh with any
degree of certainty which existential risk might solve the threat posed by another and
then mobilize programs appropriately. In response to this, the language of utopia has
shifted, and the cybernetics of scenario planning has given way to apophenic eschatology, geopolitics as a Dark Side of the Rainbow effect.18 With this shift, information
becomes unmanageable, nonlinear, associative, arbitrary. Anything can be uploaded
into the local rhetoric of conspiracy, for meta-addressability, for atemporality, for speculative realist science fiction, for hashtags of outrage, for neo-Lysenkoism.19 Ideological
apophenia grows freely in walled gardens, choking off other species. This may be the
crux of Jameson’s field notes on Walmart. This is the alibi of Masdar, New Songdo City,

360

The Black Stack

Skolkova, Foxconn, Peter Thiel’s tutelage under Rene Girard, and the dissertation that
Alex Karp, founder of Palantir, did with Jürgen Habermas before inventing big data
search tools that would provide a far more rigorous communicative rationality than
his advisor could ever grasp.20 Or perhaps not. Perhaps the most relevant totalities
multiplied one on top of another into hyperbolic geometries are those that seem too
dumb to matter. Perhaps the real candidate is not the smart city but Home Depot, and
the logistical space of the recombinant object coursing through supply chain heaven.
Ponder these warehouse arcades filled with incomplete things with incomplete utility
that must be assembled later into metathings in order to be consumed and in order to
realize their mission, a factory for 109 (people) multipled by 1028 (addresses) as potential experimental architectures. Invention depends, doesn’t it, on recalculations of substance, but
when or where? The deep time of comparative planetology brings with it local implementation in and as computational geopolitics. Instead of driving a new condition to
emerge at some postponed launch event (next fiscal quarter, after the rebuilding of
the temple, the coming of the multitude’s sovereignty, or whatever), this recalculation
would perhaps do so here and now in this space through the resorted synchronic field
of the longest possible present moment.
The geopolitics of the User we have now is, however, inadequate for that task,
including its oppositional modes, but perhaps the spells of geopolitical apophenia can
be broken. The Oedipal discourse of privacy and transparency in relation to the evil
eye of the uninvited stepfather is a necessary process toward an alter-globalism, but it
has real limits.21 A geopolitics of computation predicated at its core on the biopolitics
of privacy, of self-immunization from any compulsory appearance in front of publics,
of platforms, of states, of others, can sometimes also serve a psychological internalization of a now ascendant general economy of succession, castration anxiety—more
besides—resulting in the preparanoia of withdrawal into an atomic and anomic dream
of self-mastery that elsewhere one might call “neoliberal subject.” Like Theseus’s
paradox, where after every component of a thing has been replaced nothing original
remains but a metaphysical husk, the User is confronted with the existential lesson
that at any point, he is only the intersection of many streams (at first, the subject position of the User overproduces individual identity, but in the continuance of the same
mechanisms, it then succeeds in exploding it). That immunization is matched and
inverted by a demand for an equally absolute transparency of authority. Power apparently can tell no jokes of its own, supposedly is never ironic, and any shadows that it
harbors are already sinister, never demonstrating nuance. The autonomic narcissism
means that the world endangers you; the empire cares about you, who are such an
important threat to the order of things that your anonymity and boundaries must be
enforced as a first principle for the design of the User-layer as a whole. This glass house
of immurement calls for absolute transparency when looking up and absolute opacity when looking down, but it is never so clear where we are, even if we are within

The Black Stack

361

an architecture with clear directions of stratification in the first place. Without a clear
map of up and down in a social structure, these absolutes are inevitably contaminated
and spastically invert on each other, and so the stakes are raised (axiom: no one is
more likely to commit atrocities than someone who believes himself to be acting in
self-defense).
The space in which the discursive formation of the subject meets the technical constitution of the User enjoys a much larger horizon than the one defined by these kinds
of projects for hyperattenuated digital individuation. Consider, for example, proxy
users. uProxy is a project supported by Google Ideas, a browser modification that lets
users easily pair up across distances to allow someone in one location (trapped in the
Bad Internets) to send information unencumbered through the virtual position of
another User in another location (enjoying the Good Internets).22 Recalling the proxy
servers set up during Arab Spring, one can see how Google Ideas (Jared Cohen’s group)
might take special interest in baking this into Chrome. For Sino-Google geopolitics,
the platform could theoretically be available at a billion-user scale to those who live
in China, even if Google is not technically “in China,” because those Users, acting
through and as foreign proxies, are themselves, as far as the Internet geography is
concerned, both in and not in China. Developers of uProxy believe that it would take
two simultaneous and synchronized man-in-the-middle attacks to hack the link, and
at population scale, that should prove difficult even for the best state actors, for now.
(More disconcerting perhaps is that such a framework could just as easily be used to
withdraw data from a paired site—a paired “user”— that for good reasons should be
left alone.) Any plural User subject that is conjoined by a proxy link or other means
could be composed of different types of addressable subjects: two humans in different
countries, or a human and a sensor, a sensor and a bot, a human and a robot and a
sensor, a whatever and a whatever. In principle, any one of these subcomponents not
only could be part of multiple conjoined positions, but might not know or need to
always know which meta-User it contributes to, any more than the microbial biome
in your gut needs to know your name. Spoofing with honeypot identities, between
humans and nonhumans, is measured against the scope and scale of deep address. The
abyssal quantity and range of “things” that could, in principle, participate in these
vast pluralities includes real and fictional addressable persons, objects, locations, even
addressable massless relations between things, any of which could be a sub-User in our
Internet of haecceities.
So while The Stack and The Stack-to-come stage The Death of User in one sense—
the eclipse of a certain resolute individuated utilitarian humanism—they do so because
they also bring in the multiplication and proliferation of other kinds of nonhuman
Users (including sensors, financial algorithms, and various robots from nanometric
to landscape scale), any combination of which one might enter into a relationship
as part of a composite User. This is where the recent shift by major Cloud platforms

362

The Black Stack

into robotics may prove especially vital, because—like Darwin’s tortoises finding their
way to different Galapagos islands—the Cambrian explosion in robotics sees speciation occur in the wild, not just in the lab, and with “us” on “their” inside, not on the
outside. As robotics and cloud hardware of all scales blend into a common category
of machine, it will be unclear for everyday human-robotic interaction whether one is
encountering a fully autonomous, partially autonomous, or completely human-piloted
synthetic intelligence. Everyday interactions replay the Turing test over and over. Is
there a person behind this machine, and if so how much? In time, the answer will
matter less, and the postulation of human (or even carbon-based life) as the threshold measure of intelligence and as the qualifying gauge of a political ethics may seem
like tasteless vestigial racism, replaced by less anthropocentric frames of reference. The
position of the User then maps only very incompletely onto any one individual body.
From the perspective of the platform, what looks like one is really many, and what
looks like many may only be one. Elaborate schizophrenias already take hold in our
early negotiation of these composite User positions. The individual subject position
makes absurd demands on people as Users, as quantified selves, as SysAdmins of their
own psyche, and from this, paranoia and narcissism are two symptoms of the same
disposition, two functions of the same mask. For one, the mask works to pluralize identity according to the subjective demands of the User position as composite alloy; for
another, it defends against those same demands on behalf of the illusory integrity of a
self-identity fracturing around its existential core. Ask yourself: Is that User anonymous
because he is dissolved into a vital machinic plurality, or because public identification
threatens individual self-mastery, sense of autonomy, social unaccountability? The former and the latter are two very different politics but use the same masks and the same
software suite. Given the schizophrenic economy of the User, first overindividuated
and then multiplied and dedifferentiated, this really isn’t an unexpected or neurotic
reaction at all. It is, however, fragile and inadequate.
In the construction of the User as an aggregate profile that both is and is not specific
to any one entity, there is no identity to deduce other than the pattern of interaction
between partial actors. We may find, perhaps ironically, that the User position of the
Stack actually has far less in common with the neoliberal subject than some of today’s
oppositionalist formats for political subjectivity that hope (rightly so in many cases)
to challenge, reform, and resist the state Stack as it is currently configuring itself. However, something like a digital bill of rights for Users, despite its sweetness, becomes a
much more complicated and limited solution when the discrete identification of a
User is both so heterogeneous and so fluid.23 Are all proxy composite users one User?
Is anything with an IP address a User? If not, why not? If this throne is reserved for
one species—humans—when is any one animal of that species being a User, and when
is it not? Any time that it is generating information, is it a User? If so, that policy
would in practice trespass some of our most basic concepts of the political, and for

The Black Stack

363

that reason alone may be a good place to start. In addition to the fortification of the
User as a geopolitical subject, we also require, as I have laid out, a redefinition of the
political subject in relation to the real operations of the User, one that is based not
on homo economicus, parliamentary liberalism, poststructuralist linguistic reduction, or
the will to secede into the moral safety of individual privacy and withdrawn from
coercion. Instead, this definition should focus on composing and elevating sites of
governance from the immediate, suturing interfacial material between subjects, in the
stitches and the traces and the folds of interaction between bodies and things at a distance, congealing into different networks demanding very different kinds of platform
sovereignty.
I conclude with some thoughts on The Stack-that-we-have and on what I call The
Black Stack, a generic profile for its alternative totalities: the Stack-to-come. The Stack
we have is defined not only by its form, its layers and platform, and their interrelations,
but also by its content. As is now painfully clear, leak after leak, its content is also the
content of our daily communications, now weaponized against us. If the panopticon
effect is when you don’t know if you are being watched, and so you behave as if you
are, then the inverse Panopticon effect is when you know you are being watched but
act as if you aren’t. This is today’s surveillance culture: exhibitionism in bad faith.
The emergence of Stack platforms doesn’t promise any solution or even distinctions
between friend and enemy within this optical geopolitics. At some dark day in the
future, when considered versus a Google Gosplan, the National Security Agency may
even come to be seen by some as the “public option.” “At least it is accountable in
principle to some parliamentary limits,” they will say, “rather than merely stockholder
to avarice and flimsy user agreements.” If we take 9/11 and the rollout of the Patriot Act
as year zero for the massive data-gathering, encapsulation, and digestion campaign by
the United States (one that we are only now beginning to comprehend, even as parallel projects from China, Russia, and Europe are sure to come to the fore in time), then
we could imagine the entirety of network communication for the last decade—the big
haul—as a single deep and wide digital simulation of the world (or a significant section
of it). It is an archive, a library of the real. Its existence as the purloined property of a
state, just as a physical fact, is almost occult. Almost.
The geophilosophical profile of the big haul, from the energy necessary to preserve
it to its governing instrumentality understood as both a text (a very large text) and a
machine with various utilities, overflows the traditional politics of software.24 Its story
is much more Borges than Lawrence Lessig. Its fate is as well. Can it be destroyed? Is it
possible to delete this simulation, and is it desirable to do so? Is there a trash can big
enough for the Big Delete? Even if the plug could be pulled on all future data hauls,
stopping it all immediately, surely there must be a backup somewhere, the identical
double of the simulation, such that if we delete one, the other will be forever haunting history until it is rediscovered by future AI archaeologists interested in their own

364

The Black Stack

Paleolithic origins. Would we bury it even if we could? Would we need signs around
it like those designed for the Yucca Mountain nuclear waste disposal site warning off
unknowable future excavations? Those of us “lucky” enough to be alive during this
span would enjoy a certain illegible immortality to whatever curious metacognitive
entity pieces us back together by our online activities, both public and private, proud
and furtive, each of us rising back centuries from now, each of us a little Ozymandias
of cat videos and Pornhub.
In light of this, the Black Stack could come to mean very different things. On the
one hand it would imply that this simulation is opaque and unmappable, not disappeared, and that the whole thing is ultimately redacted. It could imply that from the
ruined fragments of this history, another coherent totality can be carved against the
grain, even from the deep recombinancy at and below the Earth layer of The Stack. Its
blackness is the surface of a world that can no longer be composed by addition because
it is so absolutely full, overwritten and overdetermined, and to add more is just ink into
an ocean. Instead of tabula rasa, this tabula plenus allows for creativity and figuration
only by subtraction, like scratching paint from the canvas, by carving away by death,
by replacement. The structural logic of any Stack system allows for the replacement of
whatever occupies one layer with something else, and for the rest of the architecture to
continue to function without pause. For example, the content of any one layer, Earth,
Cloud, City, Address, Interface, User, could be replaced (including the masochistic hysterical fiction of the individual User, both neoliberal and neo-other things) while the rest
of the layers remain a viable armature for global infrastructure. The Stack is designed
to be remade. That is its technical form, but unlike replacing copper wire with fiber
optics in the transmission layer of TCP/IP, replacing one kind of User with another is
more difficult. Today we are doing it by adding more and different kinds of things into
the User position, as described above. We should, however, also allow for more comprehensive displacements, not just by elevating things to the status of political subjects or
technical agents, but making way for genuinely posthuman and nonhuman positions.
In time, perhaps at the eclipse of the Anthropocene, the historical phase of Google
Gosplan will give way to stateless platforms for multiple strata of synthetic intelligence
and biocommunication to settle into new continents of cyborg symbiosis. Or perhaps
instead, if nothing else, the carbon and energy appetite of this ambitious embryonic
ecology will starve its host.
For some dramas, but one hopes not for the fabrication of The-Stack-to-come (Black
or otherwise), a certain humanism and companion figure of humanity still presumes
its traditional place in the center of the frame. We must let go of the demand that
any artificial intelligence, arriving at sentience or sapience, must care deeply about
humanity, us specifically, as the subject and object of its knowing and its desire. The real
nightmare, worse than the one in which the Big Machine wants to kill you, is the one
in which it sees you as irrelevant, or not even as a discrete thing to know. Worse than

The Black Stack

365

being seen as an enemy is not being seen at all (“The AI does not hate you, nor does it
love you, but you are made out of atoms which it can use for something else.”)25 One
of the integral accidents of The Stack may be the Copernican trauma that shifts us from
a design career as the authors of the Anthropocene to the role of supporting actors in
the arrival of the post-Anthropocene. The Black Stack may also be black because we
cannot see our own reflection in it. In the last instance, its geopolitics is less eschatological than chemical, because its grounding of time is based less on the promise of
historical dialectics than on the rot of isotope decay. It is drawn, I believe, by an inhuman and inhumanist molecular form finding: pre-Cambrian flora changed into peat
oil changed into children’s toys, dinosaurs changed into birds changed into ceremonial
headdresses, computation itself converted into whatever metamachine comes next,
and Stack into Black Stack.

Glossary

The specific vocabulary of The Stack is an important part of the complete picture.
Certain terms have a distinct connotation that may require additional clarification.
In some cases, if a term is also defined in the text itself, the definition here may be
paraphrased.
Accidental Megastructure It was not the plan for The Stack to become the geopolitical armature
that it is. The Stack itself is an accidental megastructure. Considered as one massively distributed
machine, it envelops the planet, over land, under water, and in orbit. Unlike other megastructures, it is not the result of one coordinated master plan (though some of its key components
were). Instead, the technologies of its layers cohere into an emergent order that is largely the
result of unintended, unplanned, unpredicted, and unmanaged technical and social interactions
at different scales and as part of different histories. See also The Stack.
Address Layer The fourth layer from the base in the Stack model, between the City and the Interface layers. Like a house connected to a postal system, any device that is connected to the Internet
is assigned a discreet address (usually temporarily) to which information is sent and from which
it is received. Assigned an address, any “thing” (a device, a person, a physical event, a piece of
data, or some other abstraction) is, in principle, present and available for communication to any
other addressee. Addressing systems are finite and so can incorporate only as many senders and
receivers as their architecture allows for. Address provides identity, exchange, and recursion. See also
Deep Address.
Alegal Something not recognizable as legal or illegal by the law but which contravenes the
present governing order in some fundamental way. In particular, an alegal action may represent something that strongly characterizes an emergent governing order, and so may be against
the logic of current governance but exemplary of the logic that may soon replace it. An example is file sharing. Originally it was neither legal or illegal because the law could not recognize
it. It then became illegal in relation to current regimes in intellectual property law, but it also
may be exemplary of an emergent governing logics of sharing, property, distribution, and asset
commonwealths.

368

Glossary

Algorithmic Governance A reflexive cycle of intentions, sensation, filtering, and decision-making that can govern the social, economic and computational cycles to which it refers and is
referred by. Reporting agents in such a system both send and receive information to a higherorder governing abstraction: a measured swarm in relation to how algorithmic governance feeds
back to them, resensing their reactions, and so on. Users observe that cycle through Interfaces,
which in turn govern User actions by delineating and filtering their options.
Ambient Interface The term has both descriptive and prescriptive connotations. It is the field of
both the physical and virtual interfaces that surround a User at any given moment; or put differently, it is the user’s world defined as a field of interfaces (an interface being defined as any point
of contact between two complex systems that governs the conditions of exchange between those
systems). The prescriptive connotation refers to designing in accordance with haptic, gestural,
or semiotic User interfaces that prioritize interaction between things existing at very different
physical and qualitative scales at once, suggesting unusual chains of remote agency and causality.
App A small software application running on a given piece of hardware that provides a highly
specific, temporary, and limited functional Interface, thereby converting the general tool into a
particular machine. The App manages information in several possible ways. It may store gathered
information, including sensors and direct User input, for immediate or later use; it may draw new
information down from more powerful applications in the Cloud to the device interface; and it
may coordinate local and Cloud-based information streams into a consolidated image. Importantly, an App platform allows for software-driven hardware modularity.
Assemblage Line The space of Logistics shifts from the spatially contiguous assembly line to the
more discontiguous assemblage line linked internally through specific interfacial chains. This
delinking makes the arrival of material goods (and the processes of the world of production,
in general) more opaque. Interfaces draw these chains as coherent wholes, gathering multiple
events and effects into a common visual frame. This conceptual gathering refers instead to how
a massively discontiguous assemblage line, bound together by exceedingly complex interfacial
relays linking continents, must be understood and represented as if it were a single pattern or
machine. For The Stack, such apparently comprehensive interfacial images of assemblage lines,
which themselves comprise interfacial relays, are, for the User, a necessary tool to manage otherwise illegibly complex chains of interaction. See also Interface Layer.
The Black Stack The generic term for The Stack-to-Come that we cannot observe, map, name, or
recognize. It may describe The Stack that remains, thriving or dead, after Homo sapiens is no longer the dominant geological actor. It is a name for the “not-blank slate” of whatever composition
The Stack will turn into. It is a composition that we know is coming, know that we will have a
hand in fashioning, but don’t know how to recognize in advance (or cannot possibly recognize in
advance because we cannot possibly ever witness it for whatever reason.) Some ante-verberations
of “this-totality-to-come” are surely already here and now.1
Camp/Enclave The camp and the bunker, detention and enclave, are inversions of the same
architecture. One is an architecture of internalization and the other of externalization, but they
share the same material profile. What may be an interiorizing partition (“enclave”) for one User at
one moment may be an exteriorizing partition (“camp”) for another at another moment. Giorgio

Glossary

369

Agamben, after Carl Schmitt, identified the camp as “the nomos of the Modern” and sovereignty
in relation to the decision to initiate the camp as a site of exception. What we may choose to identify as the nomos of the Cloud shifts that decision to the interface that causes the same architecture
to oscillate between interiorization and exteriorization, camp and enclave. Here the exception
is the inversion itself, and the normalization of that exception through the automation of that
oscillation (by software) is one key aspect of platform sovereignty for The Stack.
Capitalist Pricing Problem Market models can confuse the emergent effects of transaction liquidity with systems planning and do so at the expense of artificially segregating and suppressing the
real costs of near- and long-term “externalities.” This is contrasted with the socialist pricing problem for which centralized systems can be too slow to sense and calculate individual price signals.
An addressing mechanism capable of identifying the true “costs” of a given transaction, many of
which are now diverted into various externality sinks, could provide a price for that transaction
that reflects an accurate signal.
City Layer The third layer from the bottom of The Stack. It includes networks of megacities
situating human settlement and mobility within a single distributed urbanism that combines
physical, informational, and ecological infrastructures. These present a politics of the envelope
in which architectural and informational partitions both organize and subdivide access to social
space. It is suggested that the generic and comprehensive quality of this condition may also afford
novel forms of platform sovereignties, derived not from parliamentary universals but from a common and differential relationship to urban envelopes and interfaces.
Cloud Layer The second from the bottom of The Stack. It includes the computing and transmission hardware on which Stack software depends, such as data centers, transmission cables,
geosynchronous satellites, and wireless network technologies, and so on. It also includes Cloud
platforms, such as Google and Amazon, which provide services to their federated Users through
the applications they directly manage or those they support. Formal differences in service models
also drive strategic differences in how Cloud platforms may structure Cloud polities. These differences in turn affect geopolitical conflicts ensuing from the juxtaposition or superimposition of
national geography and those Cloud services (e.g., the Google-China conflict), from the evolution
of states into Cloud platforms and complicating effective claims of final sovereignty.
Cloud Feudalism One possible, but by no means inevitable, outcome of the consolidation of
Cloud platforms into Cloud polities is Cloud feudalism, characterized by overly centralized capture,
consolidation, and distribution of value by those platforms. In this scenario, Cloud polities realize
effective if also informal sovereignty over how they use Users, such that the ratio of platform surplus value to platform user value is highly asymmetrical and dramatically weighted in favor of the
former at the expense of the latter. Unlike in medieval feudalism, where serfs were tied to specific
sites and plots, for Cloud feudalism, Users are untethered from specific locations and migrate from
one provisional labor interaction to another. Cloud feudalism may arise in relation to automation,
but automation may also lead to entirely different macroeconomic outcomes.
Cloud Polis The model provided and enacted by global Cloud platforms to cohere Users into
proto-state entities. These entities may operate at the scale of a true state and may come into
political geographic conflict with states accordingly. Cloud Polis is characterized by hybrid

370

Glossary

geographies, incomplete governmental apparatuses, awkward jurisdictions, new regimes of interfaciality, archaic imagined communities, group allegiances, ad hoc patriotisms, and inviolable
brand loyalties: soupy mixtures both futuristic and atavistic at once. We can observe different
formal models of Cloud Polis in the service architectures of contemporary Cloud platforms, such as
Google, Amazon, Facebook, and Apple, and can deduce possible Cloud Polis by the recombination
of these architectures.
Column User connects to User by initiating a message that tunnels down through the other layers to the bottom and then back up again, and so direct communication between Users activates
all six layers down The Stack and then all six layers again back up The Stack. Any one path taken
down and up The Stack in a U-shaped trajectory is a column. The whole of the system is invoked
and activated by all connections; the whole is folded into each single instance of activation, bending the universal and the particular into one another. Any one User will initiate vast numbers of
different columns at different moments over time, thereby executing different combinations of
nested positions. Any given column tracks up and down; there is no final instance of vertical or
horizontal integration that would truly and ultimately resolve a User down to the Earth layer or
Cloud layer for good.
“Death of the User” Refers to at least three separate breaks. (1) The decentering or eclipse of a
utilitarian-cognitivist User commonly construed from conventional user-centered design by an
evolving population of nonhuman Users with very different kinds of embodied and disembodied
experiences and interactions. (2) The displacement of the soft humanism from the conceptual
center of the design for the User-subject position and toward a design of the User-subject position.
(3) A rhetorical function of information visualization whereby convincing diagrammatic mastery
of the represented data suggests that there must be an expert User somewhere who makes use of
these impressive interfaces, a figure who is in most cases only an empty or absent implication.
Deep Address While scenarios for ubiquitous computing and an Internet of Things suggest information exchange between smart natural objects, what I refer to as “deep address” is interested
in communication between very different spatial and temporal scales, absorbing any addressees
into a vast, if also fragile, communicative field that may exceed the limits of human control or
literacy. Deep address is also a mechanism for the capture of what exists and a formalization of its
space of juxtaposition, and so it is also a medium for the creative composition of those relations,
positions, and interrelations. An Internet of haecceities refers to addressable specificities that
might name particularities as they come and go, even also before and after they are recognizable
for individual Users. These enumerated specificities may be things with mass or relations between
things without mass, and accordingly the scope of any addressing platform might be functionally
limitless compared to the number of anthropometric objects it might address, or highly limited
by the ultimately abyssal scope of possibly addressable relations-of-relations-of-relations between
addresses.
Earth Layer The first layer, at the bottom of The Stack. It is the point by which the planetary
perch of the Earth itself is subsumed into the geographic frame of The Stack. It is the substrate
from which the power necessary to operate all other layers is drawn and from where the metals and minerals that comprise platform electronics are extracted. The layer is also where the

Glossary

371

recursive contradictions of projects on behalf of computational omniscience are played out most
dramatically, including by ecological surveillance metainstruments and energy optimization
grids that may or may not actually represent the critical inefficiencies that they were designed
to mitigate. It is where the horizontal subdivision of land by normative Westphalian state sovereignty is broken down by emergency challenges to the governance of a synthetic ecology with
local causes and effects but translocal scope.
Exit/Entrance The capacity of a User to leave the obligations of one platform (including a state
perhaps) and to enter into the preferable terms, confines, contexts, or protections of another
platform. For purposes of platform sovereignty, it refers less to the formal “rights” of Users to
do so, which may be stipulated contractually but made insignificant by other mechanisms that
filter exit and entrance opportunities for particular Users. This dynamic relates directly to that of
the camp/enclave as its Interfaces oscillate between interiorization and exteriorization. Platform
sovereignty over this oscillation, and thereby also over the practical ability of a given User to exit
or enter a platform, may reside in the Interface itself, as programmed by the platform or with the
User who engages the interface on their own behalf.
Geodesign The larger, ongoing, collaborate megaproject to reconfigure our ecological, geoeconomic, and geopolitical condition through an active redesign of The Stack itself. It begins from
the architectural modularity of stack platforms, from the challenge of realizing a vibrant ecology
and luxurious society, and from the recognition that the ultimate career of computation as core
infrastructure is still embryonic. It may include the redrawing of geopolitical maps, including
or excluding Westphalian forms according to different perspectives. It would include what is
commonly understood as geoengineering but would not limit the project to exclusively technical problems and solutions or to Holocene natural systems as the substance to work on. It may
work with the signal figure of the post-Anthropocene, pushing toward it and against it in various
measure. Like The Black Stack, geodesign may stand for what cannot be said or seen at this time,
but which is also inevitable.
Geography The writing or drawing of or on the Earth in order to frame its specific features,
scope, face, or landscape. It is both a kind of writing of space and of expressing, communicating,
politicizing, and defending compositional images of terrain as a precondition of the social and
technical construction of political domains to be defended. For there to be any kind of abstract
jurisdiction—secular, sacred, national, networked—there has to be a figure of space through
which force can work at all. Carl Schmitt’s concept of the nomos is one establishment of this.
Geography more broadly frames the referent over which any governing, compositional, projective frame seeks authority, not just those of modern states. Geographic inscription may range
from early geoglyphs to modern agriculture to transoceanic transmission cables.
Geopolitics For The Stack, the term has at least two connotations. First, it references the more
conventional history of political thought on a stable relationship between great state powers. Carl
Schmitt’s term Grossraum, “the Large Space,” of a regional, supernational domain of sovereign
control, like the Monroe Doctrine, is perhaps exemplary. For some, this suggests an ideal multipolar arrangement for global political entities and empires, and so as new claims on global space
are made, for example, by the Cloud, the geopolitical question is how to locate them within the

372

Glossary

genealogy of modern geopolitics. Like geography, the second sense is related to Gilles Deleuze
and Felix Guattari’s notion of geophilosophy, which suggests that thought is always tied to its
planetary situation. Geopolitics then names the ways in which a society attempts to assemble
itself, thinks its own terms, its own ethics, its own models of operation, its own logics of value,
in relation to how it is situated on its planetary perch. This second connotation may modulate
the first, and perhaps help us to understand new realities as within a longer arc of geopolitics,
geography, geology, geoscopy, and so on.
Geoscapes Maps on top of maps create the map of maps. Geoscapes are defined as a territory
of territories, each competing over the right to describe the reality of location, distance, borders,
and juxtaposition of the whole of territory itself. It composes and is composed of multiple contradictory mapping gestures and held in overlapping and finally incommensurate arrangements.
Geoscapes are held in agonistic tension by overlapping descriptions of territories as they exist,
as well as idealized territories, futuristic or atavistic, as they should be. In such utopias, idealizations continue to operate through geographic imagery, just as geographic imagery—in its fidelity,
affect, comprehensiveness—continues to imply an idealized (and sometimes utopian) image of
the world as it is. The ultimate quality of geoscapes is made only by the accumulation of territories that fill it by their drawings; it has no shape or presence other than by this accumulation.
Google Gosplan/Grossraum Refers in general to the convergence of planned and market economies into computational platforms that share ideal and practical characteristics, and specifically
to the genealogy of Google as inclusive of socialist and communist state attempts to use computing systems, primitive by today’s standards, to model and coordinate their economies, sometimes
with success and sometimes with disastrous effect. The term also implies that the future evolution of Cloud platforms that absorb traditional functions of states (such as Google, to a degree)
may realize forms of effective economic governance that are recognizable as both minimal state
and maximal state at once. It strongly suggests that there is no intrinsic relationship between
infrastructural scale computation and neoliberal economies as they are conventionally understood. Many socialist computing platforms were criticized as suffering insufficient information to
regulate price properly, but platforms like Google may suggest that information scarcity may no
longer be as strong a limitation, and in principle it implies that such platforms could also calculate the true costs of transaction externalities.
Interface Layer The fifth layer from bottom of The Stack, just below the User layer. Interfaces are
the membrane through which The Stack addresses and is addressed by Users. Interfaces, as compressed into graphical or objective forms, link (or delink) Users and the Addressed entities up and
down columns. The speed by which the embedded interface circulates information and physical
goods contributes to the real and perceived discontiguity of chains of production and distribution
of material culture for the User. The dominant contemporary genre of Interface, the graphical user
interface, is an interactive visual diagram that presents a visually coherent image of otherwise
discontiguous and opaque processes and flows. Some emerging technologies, such as augmented
reality, superimpose interfacial elements directly into the User’s perceptual field, with the capability of articulating the significance of people, places, and things according to the program of different imagined communities. This collapse of the metaphorical space between perceived object

Glossary

373

and its interpretation, especially when paired with messianic political theologies, can engender
forms of cognitive fundamentalism.
Interfacial Regime/Interfacial Totalities Particular platforms support multiple touchpoints coordinating interactions across their service offering, and in doing so, they provide a coherent and
complete array of interfaces at multiple scales. The coordination of this array is recognized as a
key aspect of user experience design, and ultimately, that experience becomes more coherent as
it becomes more complete. That coherence defines one interfacial regime in relation to another.
Unlike other geographic projections, the interface is not only a visual representation of an aspirational totality; it is an image of a totality that when acted on also instrumentally affects the world.
By using one regime exclusively, the User collaborates in that regime’s larger program. Interfacial
regimes are thereby also totality machines, both describing linkages and making projective claims
over them. Two alternate interfacial totalities may compete to describe the same site, User or process, and the mingling of overlapping totalities brings some degree of noise and ambiguity. Any
given site in the City layer may be overcome by multiple competing perceptual totalities, systems,
and sovereign geographies.
Loop Topology Geographically the modern nation-state is based on a cartographic projection
of the Earth as a horizontal plane filled with allotments of land in which individual sovereign
domains are circumscribed by lines derived from a now-normative topology of loops. The national
boundary and its governable choke-points express and defend the model in relation to other
Cloud Polis based on other geographic models, such as the transcontinental data network or the
premodern regional or worldwide religious body.
Machine as State The Stack is less a new medium of governance than it is a form of governance
in and of itself, less the machine of the state than the machine as the state. Its agglomeration of
computing machines into platform systems not only reflects, manages, and enforces forms of sovereignty; it also generates them in the first place. States and nonstate platforms compete directly
not only over the generation of Stack geographies but also for dominion over those spaces once
they are mapped.
Nomos Nomos refers to the primary act of territorial inscription that gives rise to its subsequent
formalization and structural logic in accordance; it is a making of a territorial order through
the execution of a territorial claim and physical occupation that precedes it. It is essential for
any political geographic architecture to identify the individual sites, fields, instances, and actors
within its jurisdictional field, such that any of these would be communicable as part of a regular
and governable flow of information through those spaces. The terms of the nomos are also the
shape of that space as configured by the flows that fill it up. Nomos is described as prior to every
legal, economic, and social order. It is constituted by appropriation, distribution, and production,
and only through this can it move from the particular to the universal: from arbitrary territorial
capture, to representations of spatial delineation, to a geopolitical order.
Nomos of the Cloud As the geography of the Cloud rotates from a two-dimensional map to a
vertical, sectional stack, its topography is shaped by the multiplication and superimposition of
layers of sovereign claims over the same site, person, and event. The micro-enclaves that it spawns
are variously exclusive or inexclusive, a pixelated patchwork of discontiguous partial interiors. No

374

Glossary

workable distinction between ground and water, between Cloud infrastructure and Cloud interactivity as mapped across some spectrum from tangible to virtual, has yet to congeal into a stable
order in the way that Schmitt characterized the modern European nomos. The spacefulness of The
Stack’s networks, and their ongoing occupation, settlement, and doctrinal composition, overlays
incommensurate physical and geographic forms without a common master plane, and accordingly no nomos of the Cloud may (need to) emerge.
Platform All stacks are platforms, but not all platforms are stacks. Ultimately platforms can be
seen as not only a technical model but also an institutional form along with states and markets.
Platforms are generative mechanisms, engines that set the terms of participation according to
fixed protocols (e.g., technical, discursive, formal protocols) but gain size and strength by mediating unplanned and perhaps even unplannable interactions. A platform may be defined as a
standards-based technical-economic system that may simultaneously distribute interfaces into
that system through their remote coordination and centralizes their integrated control through
that same coordination. Platform logic refers first to the abstracted systems logic of platforms and
the tendency on the part of some systems and social processes to transform themselves according
to the needs of the platforms that may serve and support them, both in advance of their participation with that platform and as a result of that participation. For a more complete list of general
characteristics of platforms see section 10.
Platform Sovereignty Refers to the still immature combination of legally articulated political
subjectivities and an infrastructurally determined sovereignty produced in relation to the platform infrastructures, regardless of whether these are privately or publicly owned. Platform sovereignty operates within territories that are composed of intersecting lines, some physical and some
virtual, and for this, deciding exceptions is no less critical. The exceptions to be decided, however,
are over what geographies those lines describe and what conditions they inscribe. These forms of
sovereignty may be produced by an automated normalized exception, programmed at the level
of the Interface, and may coincide with formal legal norms, may transgress them, or may operate
outside their supervision altogether. Exit/entrance dynamics are a key site of contestation where
different degrees of platform sovereignty cohere or filter Users in their image.
Platform Surplus Value Platforms often provide core service at no direct transaction cost to the
User. Platform economics is based on absorbing value from the provision of each transaction that
is ultimately greater than the cost of providing it. Platform surplus value is this differential. For
example, the ultimate value for Google that Users provide in training its algorithms to anticipate
future User interactions has proved much greater than Google’s net costs to provide its search
algorithms to Users for free.
Stacks Generally stacks are platforms, but not all platforms are stacks. Stacks, like most other
platforms, are generic, plastic, and extensible. They may provide for modular recombinancy of
system components, but only within the bounded set of its synthetic planes. Its generative capabilities grow through an initial subdivision of technologies into planar layers and then through
an autocratic consolidation and rationalization of these through internal interfaces and protocols.
Key to the success of this modular model is its flexibility in absorbing future technological innovations that can be introduced at any given layer (e.g., fiber optics instead of copper wire at the

Glossary

375

physical layer, a faster router, an application with better features and security) without disrupting
the existing components (so long as the new technology adheres to the protocols established by
the platform model that allow it to communicate with its vertically adjacent layers, above and
below; in principle, any machine could be inserted in a layer of the network if it can adhere to
the necessary grammar that would allow to communicate with its most proximate neighbors). For
computation, there are many different kinds of stacks with very different functions (e.g., application stacks, data structure stacks, protocol stacks). It is likely that every contemporary academic
discipline relies on some form stack model as part of its ontology, epistemology, or methodology.
The Stack Refers to a transformation in the technical infrastructure of global systems, whereby
planetary-scale computation has so thoroughly and fundamentally transformed the logics of
political geography in its own image that it has produced new geographies and new territories
that can enforce themselves. Unlike modern political geography, which divided up horizontal
maps, Stack geography also vertically layers spaces on top of one another. Instead of surveying
all the various forms of planetary-scaled computation—cloud computing, smart cities, ubiquitous computing, massive addressing systems, next-generation interfaces, nonhuman users, and
so on—as different genres or species of computing, each off on its own, this model locates them
on layers of a consolidated metaplatform, an accidental megastructure. We observe these bottomup from the Earth layer up to the User layer. Energy drawn from planetary resources at the Earth
layer drives Cloud computation, and its global platforms organize new political topologies. The
City layer is animated by those Cloud platforms from within, organizing things, events, and relations at the Address layer into Interfacial regimes that provide a window into the whole system
for Users. Together these sectional layers comprise the larger apparatus: The Stack. The Stack is
equally a descriptive system and a design model that may point us in a different direction from
its current configuration. The Stack is a model for thinking about the technical arrangement of
planetary computation as a coherent totality, as well as a conceptual model for thinking the
contradictory and complex spaces that have been produced in its image. It is both a schema that
refers to a technical system, and a technical system that demands different kinds of interpretive
schema from us. It is a work of partially accidental geodesign that demands from us further, better
deliberative geodesign.
Synthetic Catallaxy Popularized by Austrian school economics, catallaxy refers to the shared values, knowledge, information, and communication of those participating in a market economy.
Friedrich Hayek employed the term to describe what he saw as an essential failure of planned
economies, namely, that central planners could never know or process the real information
exchange within an economy in such a way as to properly set prices or govern transactions.
Contemporary Cloud platforms radically complicate any strong distinction between planned and
market economies, with many setting prices, planning infrastructure, and modeling demand in
real time, as well as making these same tools available to Users as they plan and transact. They
represent in this way a kind of synthetic catallaxy.
User Layer The top layer of The Stack and the sixth from the bottom, just above the Interface
layer. This layer situates how Users (e.g., human, animal, machine) view The Stack and that initiate chains of interaction (columns) up and down its layers, from Interface to Earth and back again.
It is also the position at which The Stack views those Users. As such the “user” has represented

376

Glossary

a contemporary technical image of the self, sometimes reduced to utilitarian frames and also
sometimes allowing for unexpected new kinds of platform sovereignty. This includes both the
exaggerated depiction of self that the User position may provide, as well as its equally radically
fractured or dissolved reflection in multiple layers of data. The User-subject is a position that
can be occupied by anything (or pluralities, multitudes, and composites) capable of initiating a
column, especially anything that can do so and respond to how The Stack communicates back
to it. This generic universality of the User-subject is both how it can flatten or curtail the human
experience of remote interactions and how it introduces otherwise unrepresented agents into
mediated contact with the whole.
User Platform Value Platform economics provide for at least two forms of “surpluses”: platform
surplus value and User platform value, which is characterized by how information entered into
a platform is made more valuable for the User at little or no direct cost to that User. As an ideal
model, Users will make tactical use of platform Interfaces to link existing systems (e.g., social,
technical, informational, biological) and in doing so are incentivized to incorporate more of their
own interests. Subsequent Users are incentivized to link their systems to benefit from the network
effects set in motion by earlier Users, who in turn enjoy increasing network benefits as more User
systems are incorporated over time. In principle, the platform itself realizes platform surplus value
from this cycle.
Westphalian State The political model of sovereignty defined by the horizontal projection and
loop topology of the modern nation-state political geography. “Westphalian” refers to the 1648
Treaty of Westphalia, symbolizing the formal consolidation of this sovereign geographic model.
The model provided the modern unit of state sovereignty as interior to that geographic loop, and
a geopolitics that would variously identify a balance of conflict between these units and a federalization of them into a particular form of cosmopolitanism. The nomos of the Cloud is characterized partially by a “delamination” of practical sovereignty from this grounding.

Notes

Introduction
1. Michel Serres and Jean-Paul Dekiss, Jules Verne: La science et l’homme contemporain: Conversations avec Jean-Paul Dekiss (Paris: Pommier, 2003). Also see Michel Serres and Maria Malanchuck,
“Jules Verne’s Strange Journeys,” Yale French Studies no. 52 (1975): 174–188.
2. Peter Watts, “The Things.” Clarkesworld, no. 40 (January 2010).
3. Stafford Beer, “Fanfare for Effective Freedom: Cybernetic Praxis in Government,” 1973,
http://ada.evergreen.edu/~arunc/texts/cybernetics/Platform/platform.ps.
4. http://www.ibtimes.com/hillary-clinton-remarks-american-leadership-council-foreign-relations
-full-text-1056708 February 01 2013 3:49 PM.
5. Carl Schmitt, The Nomos of the Earth in the International Law of the Jus Publicum Europaeum,
trans. G. L. Ulmen (New York: Telos Press, 2003).
6. Michel Foucault, The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1978–1979, trans.
Michel Senellart (New York: Picador, 2010).
7. J. G. Ballard, “Notes from Nowhere: Comments on Work in Progress,” New Worlds (October
1966): 147-151.
8. James C. Scott, Seeing like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have
Failed (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1998).
9. On Michel Serres’s conception of the transformation of hard tools into soft tools, see Steven
Connor, “Topologies: Michel Serres and the Shapes of Thought,” Angelaki, no. 15 (2004): 105–
107.
10. Throughout this book, I capitalize and italicize the names of the six layers of The Stack (Earth,
Cloud, City, Address, Interface, User) to indicate specific reference to the layer.
11. Paul Virilio, “The Museum of Accidents,” trans. Chris Turner, International Journal of Baudrillard Studies 3, no. 2 (2006). http://www.ubishops.ca/baudrillardstudies/vol3_2/virilio.htm.

378

Notes

12. Appadurai, Arjun. “Sovereignty without Territoriality: Notes for a Postnational Geography.”
in Geography of Identity, ed. Patricia Yaeger (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996),
40-58.
13. “Weary thought, incapable of maintaining itself on the plane of immanence can no longer
bear the infinite speeds that concern only the succession of movement from one point to
another, from one extensive component to another, from an idea to another, and that measure
simple associations without being able to reconstitute any concept.” Gilles Deleuze and Felix
Guattari, What Is Philosophy?, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Graham Burchell (New York: Columbia University Press, 1994), 214.
14. Chris C. Demchak and Peter J. Dombrowski, “Rise of a Cybered Westphalian Age: The
Coming Age,” Strategic Studies Quarterly 5, no. 1 (2011): 31–62.
15. Stuart Elden, “Secure the Volume: Vertical Geopolitics and the Depth of Power,” Political
Geography 34 (2013): 35–51.
16. A. Wissner-Gross and C. Freer, “Relativistic Statistical Arbitrage,” Physical Review E 82, no. 5
(2010). On this topic in relation to geodesign, see also Geoff Manaugh, “Islands and the Speed of
Light,” March 2011. http://bldgblog.blogspot.com/2011/03/islands-at-speed-of-light.html.
17. Here I am departing from Catherine Malabou’s use of the term plasticity, and toward
the mutable future I refer more directly to the chemical qualities of what we commonly call
“plastic.”

The Nomos of the Cloud
1. Carl Schmitt, quoted in Gopal Balakrishnan, The Enemy: An Intellectual Portrait of Carl Schmitt
(London: Verso, 2000), 245.
2. Michel Serres and Jean-Paul Dekiss, Jules Verne: La science et l’homme contemporain: Conversations avec Jean-Paul Dekiss (Paris: Pommier, 2003).
3. Stephen D. Krasner, Sovereignty: Organized Hypocrisy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1999).
4. Giorgio Agamben, The State of Exception, trans. Kevin Atell (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2005).
5. Carl Schmitt, quoted in Giorgio Agamben and Daniel Heller-Roazen, Homo Sacer (Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press, 1998).
6. Walter Benjamin, quoted in Beatrice Hanssen, Critique of Violence: Between Poststructuralism
and Critical Theory (London: Routledge, 2000).
7. On William Davies’s studies of the later Foucault lectures, see Nicholas Gane, “The Emergence
of Neoliberalism: Thinking through and beyond Michel Foucault’s Lectures on Biopolitics,”
Theory, Culture and Society 31, no. 4 (2014): 3–27.

Notes

379

8. David Campbell, “ITN vs. Living Marxism,” Independent Television News, August 7, 1992.
9. Liquefaction and solidification overwrite and overwhelm one another, over and again. The
introduction of the membrane-partition works against the capacity of sovereign movement,
against its abilities, and the same holds true for walls internal to the city; inside its outer walls are
inner walls, equally defeated. Does the suppression of violence support the civil society ostensibly protected from attack, or does it double in advance the attack, rendering the surface of the
city in the image of its own projective violence, ceding to it in advance? The City to be governed
can’t possibly know in advance whether and how the closing of a channel will work to stabilize
or destabilize an intended civil equilibrium. If the content of the terrorist form is that there is no
civilian space, then the content of counterterrorism is identical if inverted.
10. I would argue this framework of “the political” as articulated by Schmitt and developed by
Chantal Mouffe and Ernesto Laclau, for example, is a stale and ineffective strategy for understanding the logics of power and design in our age of ecological precarity. Put differently, only a
fool would tell you that the functional definition of the “post-political” looks like the Washington Consensus. As should be clear to the attentive reader, my rehearsal of Schmitt’s model in this
chapter is in order to overwhelm it with catastrophic contradictions.
11. See also Stuart Elden’s work on the history of the concept of territory, especially The Birth of
Territory (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013), as well as Elden, “Secure the Volume: Vertical Geopolitics and the Depth of Power,” Political Geography 34 (May 2013): 35–51; Elden, “The
Geopolitics of King Lear: Territory, Land, Earth,“ in Law and Literature, 25: 2 (2013); and Elden,
“Chamayou’s Manhunts: From Territory to Space?” for The Funambulist Papers: Volume 2 (Punctum Books, 2014).
12. Stewart Elden: “Schmitt reminds us that the Greek word nemein, from which nomos is
derived, means both ‘to divide’ and ‘to pasture’ (1997 [1950]: 40; 2003 [1950]: 70). Hannah
Arendt has similarly noted the relation between ‘law and hedge in the word nomos’, stressing the
relation between law and boundary line or zone, and pointing out that ‘the Greek word for law,
nomos, derives from nemein, which means to distribute, to possess (what has been distributed)
and to dwell’ (1958: 63 n. 62). The legal is thus tied directly to the land. As Schmitt continues:
‘Nomos is the measure by which the ground and soil of the earth [Grund und Boden der Erde] in a
particular order is divided and situated; it is also the form of political, social, and religious order
determined by this process. Here, measure, order, and form constitute a spatially concrete unity.
(1997 [1950]: 40; 2003 [1950]: 70).” See Elden, “Reading Schmitt Geopolitically: Nomos, Territory
and Großraum,” in Spatiality, Sovereignty, and Carl Schmitt: Geographies of the Nomos, ed. Stephen
Legg (New York: Routledge, 2011), 91–105.
Schmitt himself defines it in more than one way. “The Greek noun nomos derives from the
verb nemein, and like the latter, has three meanings. Firstly, nemein is the equivalent of the
German nehmen, to take. Hence nomos means seizure. As the Greek legein-logos corresponds to
the German spechen-Sprache, so too, the German nehmen-Nahme corresponds to the Greek
nemein-nomos. At first, it meant the seizure of land, and later it also meant the appropriation of
the sea, much of which is part of our historical review here. In the industrial sector, one speaks
of the appropriation of the means of production. The second meaning is the division and

380

Notes

distribution of what was seized. Hence also the second sense of nomos, the basic division and
repartition of the soil and the resulting ownership order. The third meaning is to tend, that is, to
use, exploit, and turn to good account the partitioned land, to produce and to consume. Seizingdividing-tending in that sequence are the three fundamental notions of every concrete order.
More about the meaning of nomos can be found in my book The Nomos of the Earth (1950).” See
Carl Schmitt, Land and Sea (1942) (Washington: Plutarch Press, 1997), 37.
13. This ordering order of the State as the guarantor of sovereignty was also, at Westphalia in
1648 as elsewhere, a displacement and replacement of State religion as the ultimate provider of
the law of the land. This moment in the invention of secularism was a geographic undertaking,
and one that is under attack from the front and the rear at once. The Modern Nomos is fragmenting and perforating, it is distorted and deformed by both planetary computation, which produces
new territories in its image, and by resurgent political theology which reconvenes pre-modern
geo-jurisdictional domains.
14. Fredric Jameson, “Notes on the Nomos,” South Atlantic Quarterly 104, no. 2 (2005): 199–204.
15. “He interestingly applies this to the growth of piracy at this time too: freedom of the sea vs.
limits on land is another hallmark that starts to develop. Two different concepts of the sea begin
to be posited: one by France, who finds the sea the common property of all, one by England, who
finds the sea to be the property of no one—presaging, of course, future problems. Thus, a seemingly primordial opposition between land and sea (later on itself relativized and historicized)—
between landed order and maritime lawlessness—fails, despite the Deleuzian overtones of smooth
(maritime) versus striated or landed space, to generate any nostalgia for the nomadic, for gypsies
or hunters and gatherers, as that utopian and Rousseauesque valorization of early social forms
emerged from Lévi-Straussian structuralism.” Ibid.
16. For example, Paul Virilio, Open Sky (London: Verso, 1997).
17. Jameson, “Notes on the Nomos.”
18. The new space predicates another addressability, just as another addressability predicates the
new space.
19. The quote is from Alexander Dugin, a Russian, Eurasian-ultranationalist mystic-sociologistcrank.
20. “Schmitt referred to ‘a contemporary German philosopher—Heidegger—who had captured
the significance of this Raumrevolution as a paradigm shift which promised to overcome the
nihilism of empty space: ‘Die Welt ist nicht im Raum, sondern der Raum is in der Welt’ (‘The
world is not in space; rather, space is in the world’). Even if these new representations of space
had not yet been grasped in coherent conceptual form….” Gopal Balakrishnan, The Enemy: An
Intellectual Portrait of Carl Schmitt (London: Verso, 2000), 244.
21. Ibid., 249.
22. Cornelia Vismann, “Starting from Scratch: Concepts of Order in No Man’s Land,” in War,
Violence and the Modern Condition, ed. Bernd-Rüdiger Hüppauf (Berlin: De Gruyter, 2010), 46.

Notes

381

23. See, for example, James Gleick, The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood (New York: Vintage, 2012), 169, and http://www.farmcollector.com/Farm-life/IT-ALL-TREW.aspx.
24. Giacomo Marramao, for instance, argues that while the spatial dimension of Schmitt’s politics is central, it cannot be circumscribed, confined, or topologically delimited, but it can be
temporarily localized; like the decision and its borderline, the political works not by founding or
composing, but by settling and dividing. Giacomo Marramao, “The Exile of the Nomos: For a
Critical Profile of Carl Schmitt,” Cardozo Law Review 21 (2000): 1567.
25. Balikrishnan, The Enemy, 241.
26. Vissman, “Starting from Scratch,” 46–64.
27. “There is perhaps also an indication here that a conceptual revolution is underway within
the Air Force, where the earth itself—geological space—is seen as merely a thicker version of the
sky.” Geoff Manaugh, “Bldg Blog,” September 22, 2011, http://bldgblog.blogspot.com/2011/09/
tunnel-countertunnel.html.
28. “Der Raum wird zum Leistungsraum” (the space becomes a space of performance). See Stephen
Legg and Alexander Vasudevan, “Introduction: Geographies of the Nomos,” in Legg, Spatiality,
Sovereignty, and Carl Schmitt, 16.
29. “Indeed, elsewhere in the Völkerrechtliche Grossraumordnung, Schmitt advocated a biological
over a mathematical approach to thinking state space.” Ibid.
30. See Paul Virilio and Sylvere Lotringer, Pure War (Los Angeles: Semiotext(e), 1997).
31. Schmitt’s essential distinction between friend and enemy underwrites these agonistic politics. See Chantal Mouffe, On the Political (London: Routledge, 2005).
32. Legg and Vasudeven, “Introduction: Geographies of the Nomos,” 15.
33. See, for example, Nikolai von Kreitor, “The Concept of Grossraum in Carl Schmitt’s Jurisprudence: The Historical Necessity of a New Russian Grossraum,” August 7, 1970, http://www.
amerika.org/globalism/the-concept-of-grossraum-in-carl-schmitts-jurisprudence-nikolai-von-kreitor/. This is the language of today’s Russian Eurasianists, France’s Nouvelle Droite, Japanese
imperial revisionists, as well, it must be said, of some voices on the European Left.
34. For a melodramatic but not uninformed account, see Julian Assange, When WikiLeaks Met
Google (N.p.: OR Books, 2014).
35. See, for example, the European Schengen Cloud, or Brazil’s proposed “independent Internet”:
http://www.itworld.com/article/2705173/networking-hardware/bric-nations-plan-their
-own--independent-internet.html.
36. Chris C. Demchak and Peter J. Dombrowski, “Rise of a Cybered Westphalian Age: The
Coming Age,” Strategic Studies Quarterly 5, no. 1 (2011): 31–62.
37. Alexander Galloway, Protocol: How Control Exists after Decentralization (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2006), is a key text on these points.

382

Notes

38. I paraphrase D’Arcy Thompson’s dictum, “Form is a diagram of forces.” See Thompson, On
Growth and Form (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1917).
39. Typical of this perspective is Jean-Luc Nancy, The Creation of the World, or Globalization
(Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 2002).
40. A particularly egregious example is Franco “Bifo” Berardi’s missive, Neuro-Totalitarianism in
Technomaya Goog-Colonization of the Experience and Neuro-Plastic Alternative (Los Angeles:
Semtiotext(e), and New York: Whitney Museum, 2014). His target is Google Glass, a piece of
hardware that takes on black magic powers in his estimation. In the Interfaces chapter, I will discuss the dangers of augmented reality-based interfacial totalities to engender forms of cognitive
totalitarianism, but this is not because they train attention on artificial images, negating our natural faculties of reason and experience (see also the Phaedrus, and Socrates’ admonitions against
the written word, 370 B.C., or the whole history of experimental cinema). Rather it is that augmented reality could mediate so well the sort of mythopoetic political Messianism that is the
lifeblood of any lunatic fundamentalism: a stunted flame that he (and Tiqqun for that matter)
tend with duly incoherent melancholia.
41. For examples of that perplexed melancholy see the works of Franco “Bifo” Berardi.
42. After having presented this research at the Winchester School of the Arts at University of
Southampton in 2013, I have also had the pleasure of an ongoing discussion with Ryan Bishop
about the uses and abuses of the term nomos. His own work on this, linking nomos to automation—as in “autonomous”—as another way that the policing of the inside and outside takes place,
should be an key referent for those interested in the future of the concept.
43. I paraphrase my lecture and op-ed “We Need to Talk about TED,” 2013, http://www
.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/30/we-need-to-talk-about-ted.

Platform and Stack, Model and Machine
1. Boris Groys, “Form,” Metahaven, Uncorporate Identity (Baden: Lars Müller, 2010), 262.
2. Quoted in http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/networks/osi-the-internet-that-wasnt?utm
_source feedburner&utm_medium feed&utm_campaign Feed%3A IeeeSpectrum %28IEEE
Spectrum%29.
3. The contradictions between private ownership of platforms and how they do or do not make
good on and public service or public interests is the focus of much Martin Kenney’s work. What
he calls “Platform Capitalism” presents several challenges to conventional political science and
organizational theory. See http://hcd.ucdavis.edu/faculty/webpages/kenney/writings/writings
.html By contrast, David Theo Goldberg considers platforms as kind of world-projection and
world-making. See his “World as Platform” essay at https://medium.com/genres-of-scholarly
-knowledge-production/world-as-platform-da7f8a1f042e.
4. There are other available definitions, but far fewer that the ubiquity of the word platform
would suggest. Annabelle Gower and Michael Cusumano write, “In this paper we use the

Notes

383

platform definition of Gawer and Cusumano: ‘A foundation technology or set of components
used beyond a single firm and that brings multiple parties together for a common purpose or to
solve a common problem.’” They also state that the value of the platform increases exponentially
with more complementary products and services and more users. See their “Defining Software
Ecosystems: A Survey of Software Platforms and Business Network Governance,” 2004, http://
slingerjansen.files.wordpress.com/2009/04/definingsecos.pdf.
5. This discussion of platforms draws on an ongoing discussion with Benedict Singleton, Nick
Srnicek, and Alex Williams, on their potential as technical models and model technologies. Singleton, “On Craft and Being Crafty” (PhD dissertation, Northumbria University, 2014); Singleton,
“The Long Con,” in When Site Lost the Plot, ed. Robin Mackay (Urbanomic: Falmouth, 2015);
Srnicek, “Eyes of the State: Machine Thinking and the Production of Economic Knowledge” (presented at the Incredible Machines conference, Vancouver, March 7–8, 2014); and Srnicek and
Williams, Inventing the Future: Folk Politics and the Struggle for Postcapitalism (London: Verso, forthcoming).
6. For a nontechnical overview, see James Gleick, The Information: A History, A Theory, A Flood
(New York: Pantheon Books, 2011), especially for a history of longitudinal demarcation, network
synchronization, and time zones.
7. The history of notational systems deserves more than a few dissertations. In order to engineer
his difference engine, Charles Babbage first had to invent a now long-forgotten notational system
for how parts would be manufactured to make sure that one worker’s gesture would be compatible with that of another. Architects know Louis Kahn’s notational system to analyze and plan the
movement of autonomous agents through pathways, used but once for his unrealized project to
redesign automobile traffic flows in Philadelphia. His beautiful diagram of how cars might turn
left and right hangs on the wall of the Museum of Modern Art in New York may prove to be a
particularly breathtaking prototype for future shipping manifests.
8. See Rem Koolhaas, Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for Manhattan (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1978).
9. “Generative entrenchment” comes from William Wimsatt’s philosophy of engineering. See
his Re-Engineering Philosophy for Limited Beings: Piecewise Approximations to Reality (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 2007). Thanks to Benedict Singleton and Reza Negarastani for the
original reference.
10. See Srnicek, “Eyes of the State.”
11. For a Marxist perspective on this asymmetry, see Matteo Pasquinelli, “Google’s PageRank
Algorithm: A Diagram of Cognitive Capitalism and the Rentier of the Common Intellect,” in
Deep Search, ed. Konrad Becker and Felix Stalder (London: Transaction Publishers, 2009).
12. This example comes from conversations with Bruce Randolph Tizes.
13. The stack model referred to is the network protocol stack, but this is not the only form of a
software/hardware stack. Memory stacks based on FIFO (first in–first out) are taught in basic data
structures courses. Application programming stacks are central to how web applications

384

Notes

are engineered. Any complex software system is built from layers of code designed to perform
different low-level or high-level functions, from the operating system kernel, to system utilities,
to core and application services, to applications themselves and the graphical user interfaces that
translate human-cultural interest into machine-executable instruction and back again. In systems
designed for a densely networked computing environment where groups of machines may be
serving applications, accessing shared stores of data, and parsing data for distribution over the
web to provide specific solutions, the programming architecture becomes more layered, more
generic, and more modular. Programming stacks are sometimes an aligned combination of an
operating system: a server, a database system, a programming and scripting language for the
authoring of unique applications. For example, the LAMP stack (Linux/Apache/MySQL/PHP, or
Python) is (was) a widely used, open source set of programming languages and related tools and
libraries for building general-purpose web applications. (This generic structure allows programmers of code on one layer, the Python scripts, to rely on the code constructed at the other levels
by other programmers, knowing that the entire system will work as planned. Available open
source code written for one project may be repurposed for a particular project, and as we move up
the stack, that code requires more specific programming for specific applications.) For all such
programming stacks, layers divide the computational labor of input, processing, storage, and
machine control in regular and predictable ways, and so the performance of one is dependent on
the other.
14. Le Corbusier’s Five Points include, first, supports, a grid of reinforced concrete load-bearing
columns. Next, roof gardens that can be occupied, then the free-designed ground plan, with an
absence of supporting walls. Next is the free design of the facade, separating the exterior from its
structural function. Finally is a long horizontal window cut along the entire length of the facade,
allowing all rooms to be lit equally. The building is reduced to five essential layers, each of which
can be modified on its own, but all of which integrate into a preferred whole. Thanks to Josh
Taron for making the initial link with stack models.
15. See also Rem Koolhaas, “Bigness or the Problem of the Large,” in S, M, L, XL (New York:
Monacelli Press, 1995).
16. In terms of Benjaminian forms of violence, its force is simultaneously “constituent” and
“constituted.”
17. See Galloway, “The Poverty of Philosophy: Realism and Post-Fordism,” Critical Inquiry 39
(2013): 347–366. Here we are amused to learn that “capitalism” uses computation to treat all
things as interchangeable data, that certain kinds of “realism” define things according to a flat
ontology, and so by analogical transfinite induction, mathematics is thought captured by capital.
In some ways, we can mark flame wars between philosophical “Marxists” and “realists” in relation to past conflicts between historicists and structuralists, humanist Marxists and structuralfunctionalists, New Left and cybernetics, and so on. For one alliance, the agonistic telos of human
history is more self-evident, and for another, history doesn’t even contain itself, let alone
the world.
18. On “basing and superstructuring,” see Fredric Jameson, Valences of the Dialectic (London:
Verso Press, 2010).

Notes

385

19. Coming to mind, perhaps unfairly, are the declarations of confusion and outrage continuously forthcoming from Jürgen Habermas.
20. For the original 1995 “California Ideology” essay by Richard Barbrook and Andy Cameron,
see http://www.alamut.com/subj/ideologies/pessimism/califIdeo_I.html. For a characteristically
misinformed contemporary take on Google, see Shoshanna Zuboff’s “Dark Google” in Frankfurther Allgemeine, April 30, 2014, http://www.faz.net/aktuell/feuilleton/debatten/the-digital-debate/
shoshanna-zuboff-dark-google-12916679.html?printPagedArticle true. For those unfamiliar, Survival Research Laboratories is a Bay Area-based “industrial performing arts” collective famous for
its pyrotechnic displays of machinic mayhem and which might typify a DIY engineering ethic
often associated with the “California Ideology,” whereas Page Mill Road in Palo Alto (and Sand
Hill Road in Menlo Park) have housed important clusters of important Silicon Valley venture
capital firms.
21. Nick Whitford-Dyer, “Red Plenty Platforms,” Culture Machine 14 (2013): 1–27, and Tiziana
Terranova, “Red Stack Attack!” in #Accelerate: The Accelerationist Reader, ed. Robin Mackay and
Armen Avanessian (Falmouth, Cornwall: Urbanomic and Merve Verlag, 2014), 379–400, both
make explicit connections between Spufford’s version of cybernetic planning, contemporary
computing platforms, and my Stack thesis. Terranova considers how an alternative Stack could
operate for far more communitarian economies, and Whitford-Dyer draws on the Address layer
specifically to consider how that Red Plenty Platform/Red Stack might identify and index components of the economy it asked to calculate. As discussed below, parallel considerations about
computational platforms and marginal cost are also coming from across the political spectrum,
from bitcoin macroeconomics to Jeremy Rifkin’s “Zero-Marginal Cost Society.” See Jeremy Rifkin,
The Zero Marginal Cost Society: The Internet of Things, the Collaborative Commons, and the Eclipse of
Capitalism (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014), and Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Commonwealth (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2009).
22. Francis Spufford, Red Plenty (Minneapolis, MN: Graywolf Press, 2012).
23. From Whitford-Dyer, “Red Plenty Platforms”: “It will, however, identify three cybernetic
tendencies that point towards the ‘higher’ phase of communism: automation, copying and peerto-peer production … I am thinking tangentially about a metasystem in which the minimum
amount of carbon has to be assembled to meet the desires and demands of all consumers because
an existing inventory of objects can be instantaneously redistributed where it is needed.” A parallel vision, minus the self-identified socialism and plus a lot of nanoscale molecular manufacturing, is Eric Drexler, Radical Abundance: How a Revolution in Nanotechnology Will Change Civilization
(New York: Public Affairs Press, 2013).
24. Eden Medina is the expert on Cybersin. See her “Designing Freedom, Regulating a Nation:
Socialist Cybernetics in Allende’s Chile,” Journal of Latin American Studies 38 (2006): 571–606, and
her book Cybernetic Revolutionaries: Technology and Politics in Allende’s Chile (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2011).
25. This is ironic for several reasons, including that when General Pinochet later invited the
Chicago Boys (the neoliberal economists associated with Milton Friedman at the University of

386

Notes

Chicago) to help fix the economy, they would recommend “free market” policies that resemble
in some ways the libertarian economic ethos of some aspects of Silicon Valley culture, where
cutting-edge information networks are now hatched.
26. The biological metaphor is important for a diverse range of social-theoretical perspectives.
These range from Emile Durkheim’s cultural integration, to Fascist nationalist organicism, to
Edward O. Wilson’s sociobiology, to Talcott Parsons’s structural-functionalism and Niklas Luhmann’s systems theory to Donna Haraway’s cyborg feminism and Giorgio Agamben’s biopolitics,
and so on.
27. See T-Engine Forum, http://www.t-engine.org/; TRONweb, http://tronweb.super-nova.co.jp/
itron.html; “Japan’s Homegrown Operating System TRON Competes for the Info-Appliance
Market,” Trends in Japan, May 22, 2003, http://web-japan.org/trends/science/sci030522.html.
28. Jan Krikke, “The Most Popular Operating System in the World,” Linux Insider, October 3,
2003, http://www.linuxinsider.com/story/31855.html.
29. “Asking the Project Leader: Where’s TRON Headed in the Future?” 1996, http://tronweb
.super-nova.co.jp/sakamurainterview_tw42.html. Images of TRON diagrams can be found most
easily on Wikipedia, but are also on this book’s companion website, thestack.org. See http://
tronweb.super-nova.co.jp/tronlogo.html; http://tronweb.super-nova.co.jp/homepage.html; and
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TRON_Project.
30. As discussed, the four-layer TCP/IP “won,” but for purposes of explication, the open systems
interconnection (OSI) seven-layer model provides a more detailed profile. As indicated, the OSI
model is a standardized subdivision of component zones and functions of information networks
into logical discrete layers, each of which provides specific “services” to the layer just beneath in
the stack and receives services from the layer just above it. In this, it is a classic tiered stack
architecture, both as a functional distributed machine and its abstract model, and worth some
detail. At the base of the OSI stack is the physical layer of copper wire, electronic switches, antennas, or other hardware. Above this in the OSI model is the data-link layer, which transmits information directly between two networked entities and corrects for errors at the physical layer level.
The Ethernet port and cable on your computer are examples. The network layer addresses individual senders and receivers of messages. Your IP address is a network layer protocol, as is the
border gateway protocol. One level above this, the transport layer polices byte traffic, flow, and
reliability and delivers it safe to the right application process. For example, TCP (transmission
control protocol) is used for HTTP. Above this, the session layer manages the opening and closing
sessions between end user applications and keeping different data streams in proper sync. The
presentation layer above is responsible for translating information between the application layer
above it, the one you and I interact with most directly, and the session layer and other network
layers below. The renderings of ASCII text or XML data into and from binary strings are examples.
That application layer contains a multitude of protocols, interfaces, and application programming interfaces that allow end users, you and me, to query and access network resources as if
they were part of our local system. “Above” these “base” seven layers are individual operating
systems—applications like browsers, image editors, word processors, and so forth that, to the
extent that each is pulling information from the network beneath it and pushing information

Notes

387

toward it, are themselves interfaces with and into the strata of network depths, and as visual,
imagistic interfaces, they are diagrams of what these networks do.
31. Cerf is now chief scientist at Google and hard at work on, among other things, the embryonic “interplanetary Internet,” which seeks to account for the unique network design problems
posed by slow lunar orbits, message delays due to interstellar lag in the speed of light, and so
forth. As discussed in the Address chapter, the specification and implementation of IP version 6
addressing systems, with which he is also deeply involved, plays a crucial role in the material
future of The Stack.
32. Andrew L. Russell, “OSI: The Internet That Wasn’t,” IEEE Spectrum, June 30, 2013,
http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/networks/osi-the-internet-that-wasnt.
33. The model platform Stack is not a perfect correlation with the “real stacks” that cohere the
global Internet, nor is it meant to be. It is a heuristic, a diagram that is only as useful as what
work it is asked to do. This leeway allows for considering how it could function in different ways.
Unlike some models, such as OSI, which allow the passage of information only between adjacent
layers, up and down or between sibling layers at the same level in adjacent stacks, the inexhaustibility of any layer suggests that The Stack might extend a conditional and exceptional promiscuity of direct communication between nonadjacent layers (e.g., Address directly to Cloud, User to
Earth). It need not necessarily evolve into this kind of open totality, but potential contact between
the technologies gathered in remote layers is a contingency continuously provoked by the persistent exception of the reversible border (usually most visible in the flip-flops of in and out at the
Interface layer). We can speculate that the filtering, codifying, and governing of this eccentric
splicing between layers of the platform not only implies very different design agenda but perhaps
an as-yet-to-be-articulated geopolitics and geophilosophy as well.
34. This parallels in many ways Jussi Parrika, The Anthrobscene (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2014).

Earth Layer
1. Michel Serres and Jean-Paul Dekiss, Jules Verne: La science et l’homme contemporain: Conversations avec Jean-Paul Dekiss (Paris: Pommier, 2003).
2. Georges Perec, “The World,” in Species of Spaces and Other Pieces, ed. John Sturrock (New York:
Penguin, 2008), 77–79.
3. Carl Sagan, multiple public lectures. See, for example, Reid Kanaley, “Carl Sagan Seeks Unity
to Save Earth,” Inquirer (Philadelphia), April 24, 1989.
4. The photo I describe is from the same series as that used on the cover of the posthumous collection of Deleuze’s writings, Desert Islands and Other Texts, 1953–1974 (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2004). Readers may reference the image at this book’s companion website, thestack.org.
5. Originally conceived in 1936 by twenty-four-year-old Alan Turing and called an “a-machine”
(for “automatic machine”), it describes a hypothetical universal computer, which, given enough

388

Notes

time and energy, would be capable of calculating any “computable” problem. In that paper, “On
Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungs Problem,” Proceedings of the
London Mathematical Society, Ser. 2 42 (1937), Turing demonstrates the range of problems that in
fact are not computable. The figure of the Turing machine, as a philosophical and machinic
hypothesis, stands for the technology of universal computation and for the ultimate limits of
computation within mathematics.
6. Nicholas Gane and Stephen Sale, “Interview with Friedrich Kittler and Mark Hansen,” Theory,
Culture, and Society 24 (2007): 323–329.
7. Lucretius, De Rerum Natura, 1 B.C., in Lucretius on the Nature of the Universe, ed. R. E. Latham
(London: Penguin Books, 1951):
We wish thee also well aware of this:
The atoms, as their own weight bears them down
Plumb through the void, at scarce determined times,
In scarce determined places, from their course
Decline a little—call it, so to speak,
Mere changed trend. For were it not their wont
Thuswise to swerve, down would they fall, each one,
Like drops of rain, through the unbottomed void;
And then collisions ne’er could be nor blows
Among the primal elements; and thus
Nature would never have created aught …
… For whatsoever through the waters fall,
Or through thin air, must quicken their descent,
Each after its weight—on this account, because
Both bulk of water and the subtle air
By no means can retard each thing alike.

8. The implications continue to play out in contemporary debates from artificial intelligence to
the philosophy of physics (e.g., if emergent calculative form is universal, then not only is “human
thought” no longer a necessary referent model for artificial intelligence, but its own ideas about
deterministic rationality do very little to guarantee the regime of computational processing, and
the other way around). Computing machines do not differentiate “rational” instructions from
irrational ones, and we needn’t even know what is going on within a computer that makes computation interesting. Computation takes place outside any direct reliance on necessary reason, or
“regimes of knowledge primarily associated with the laws of thought—[it] does things outside
of it.” See Robert Jackson, “Negarastani, Computing and Knowledge,” Algorithm and
Contingency, December 2, 2012, http://robertjackson.info/index/2012/12/negarestani-computing
-and-knowledge/.
9. Turing himself began to address the theoretical foundations of biological systems, with “The
Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis,” published in 1952 in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London B 237 (641): 37–72.
10. Once again, I am not qualified to offer even an implied opinion on whether matter is fundamentally discrete or continuous, or related questions. For a general account on behalf of the
strong digital physics position, see, for example, Seth Lloyd, Programming the Universe: A Quantum

Notes

389

Computer Scientist Takes on the Cosmos (New York: Vintage, 2006). Craig Hogan’s research into
discrete matter is certainly of interest. A general reader can turn to Michael Moyer, “Is Space
Digital?” Scientific American (February 2012), http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/is-space
-digital/. Reza Negarastani approaches this rather differently and has offered both incisive critiques of computationalism (see his “Abducting the Outside,” http://blog.urbanomic.com/
cyclon/archives/2012/11/abducting_the_o.html), as well as impassioned defenses of a Turingcentric version (see his “The Revolution Is Back (Turing, Functional Realization and Computational Description),” http://blog.urbanomic.com/cyclon/Turing-Revolution.pdf).
11. Apparently there are something like 700 terabytes of potential storage in a gram of DNA. Be
that as it may, the rush to collapse fragile metaphors between biological-machinic and
computational-machinic processes is unnecessary. Sebastian Anthony, “Harvard Cracks DNA
Storage, Crams 700 Terabytes of Data into a Single Gram,” ExtremeTech, August 17, 2012,
http://www.extremetech.com/extreme/134672-harvard-cracks-dna-storage-crams-700-terabytes
-of-data-into-a-single-gram.
12. The “next machine” after computation is a favorite motif of mathematician Giuseppe Longo.
See, for example, Longo and Francis Baily, Mathematics and the Natural Sciences: The Physical Singularity of Life (London: Imperial College Press, 2011).
13. Again bioinformational systems (such as how bacteria encode messages) provide a rich source
of speculation on the postsilicon future of artificial computation, but in the meantime, more
prosaic (but still remarkable) engineering at the scale by which physical matter and information
directly interface may prove more fruitful.
14. This tendency can also lead toward unlikely speculative convergences between advanced science and technology and singularity-inflected “God in/of the gaps.” See Paul Davies and Niels
Henrik Gregerson, Information and the Nature of Reality: From Physics to Metaphysics (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2004). Peter Watts, Echopraxia (New York: Tor Books, 2015), tinkers
with this inflection quite effectively.
15. Or consider instead Friedrich Kittler’s association of film, the gramophone, and the typewriter with three distinct modes of modern thought.
16. The ideological position is made in Alexander Galloway, “The Poverty of Philosophy: Realism and Post-Fordism,” Critical Inquiry 39 (2013): 347–366. Aesthetic suspicion of digital systems
couched in political suspicion (perhaps also couched in professional anxiety) has also led to awkward schisms in art. See Clare Bishop, “The Digital Divide: Contemporary Art and New Media,”
Artforum (September 2012).
17. Luciana Parisi, Contagious Architecture: Computation, Aesthetics, and Space (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2013).
18. See my editorial “Outing A.I.: Beyond the Turing Test,” New York Times, February 23, 2015.
19. To me this is the purchase of the Promethean accelerationism of Reza Negarastani and Ray
Brassier. See Brassier’s “Prometheanism and Real Abstraction” in Speculative Aesthetics, ed. Robin
Mackay, Luke Pendrell, James Trafford (Urbanomic Press: Falmouth, 2014), and Negarastani’s

390

Notes

“Labor of the Inhuman, Part 1: Human,” e-flux journal #52, 02/2014, and “The Labor of the Inhuman, Part II: The Inhuman,” e-flux journal #53, 03/2014.
20. See, for example, Brian Massumi, “‘Technical Mentality’ Revisited: Brian Massumi on Gilbert
Simondon with Arne De Boever, Alex Murray and Jon Roffe,” Parrhesia, no. 7 (2009): 36–45,
http://www.parrhesiajournal.org/parrhesia07/parrhesia07_massumi.pdf.
21. See Matteo Pasquinelli, “Machinic Capitalism and Network Surplus Value: Notes on
the Political Economy of the Turing Machine,” 2011, http://matteopasquinelli.com/docs/
Pasquinelli_Machinic_Capitalism.pdf.
22. With great care and skill, Jussi Parikka explores the deep materiality of our media technology
hardware in A Geology of Media (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2015).
23. See USGS survey at http://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/commodity/niobium/myb1
-2009-niobi.pdf and Philippa Velhinho, “Corporate Coltan Rush Fuels Congolese Violence,”
Green Left Weekly, September 24, 2012, https://www.greenleft.org.au/node/52337.
24. See Conrad Taylor, “The Curse of Congo’s Mineral Wealth,” Conradiator, November 11, 2008,
https://conradiator.wordpress.com/2008/11/11/the-curse-of-congos-mineral-wealth.
25. After KONY2012, the ill-fated social media campaign, we could define a “Konyism” as a selfcongratulatory Africa-themed social cause, invested in by well-meaning but naive Westerners,
that ultimately has little effect other than wasting the concern of benefactors, or worse.
26. Chiara Frazzoli and Orish E. Orisakwe, “Electronic Revolution and Electronic Wasteland: The
West/Waste Africa Experience,” Journal of Natural and Environmental Sciences, October 2, 2010,
http://www.academyjournal.net/asj/index.php/NES/article/viewFile/27/ORISAKWE.
27. E. A. Grosz, Chaos, Territory, Art: Deleuze and the Framing of the Earth (New York: Columbia
University Press, 2008), 17.
28. Andrew Benjamin, Architectural Philosophy (New York: Continuum Press, 2001), is a particularly interesting study of these various forms of the line. Deleuze and Guattari’s typology in the
chapter “On the Line” is an essential definition. Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, A Thousand
Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1980).
29. Stuart Elden’s work on the history of the notion of territory is instructive here. See his The
Birth of Territory (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013).
30. Remember that within the Western European philosophical tradition, Georges Bataille
defined architecture as the “physiognomy of power,” an actual anatomy of the social, and Walter
Benjamin referred to history as “a state of siege,” a capturing and binding behind the fortifying
wall (Holier, 1990, Benjamin, 1986). Today it is almost axiomatic in contemporary architectural
theory to cite the partition, the very verb and noun of cleaving space and of instantiating that
gesture with a solid plane as perhaps the fundamental grammar of territory and enclosure
(Andrew Benjamin on this). The central importance of “partition” is a scarce point of agreement
on ontological matters between those associated with the deconstructive turn (Wigley, 1995) and
the Deleuzian program that displaced it in architectural curricula. See Bernard Cache, Earth

Notes

391

Moves: The Furnishing of Territories (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995), and Elizabeth Grosz, Architecture from the Outside (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001). Denis Holier, Against Architecture: The
Writings of Georges Bataille (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990), Walter Benjamin, Reflections:
Essays, Aphorisms, Autobiographical Writings (New York: Schocken Press, 1986). Mark Wigley, The
Architecture of Deconstruction: Derrida’s Haunt (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995).
31. “Google Earth is the end of the world. … All you have to do is press to zoom in, and you can
almost see a car’s license plate. We need the bigness of the world, the rotundity and immensity of
the globe. But we are exhausting that, just as we have exhausted its resources. We are exhausting
its extent, and its temporal distance.” Paul Virilio in Raymond Depardon and Paul Virilio, Native
Land, Stop Eject (Paris: Fondation Cartier pour l’art contemporain, 2008).
32. Gopal Balakrishnan, Antagonistics: Capitalism and Power in the Age of War (London: Verso,
2009).
33. Its terminological origins are not obscure. Geo from the Greek
(“Earth”) refers to our
planet, and specifically to the land, the ground, the land as ground, and when paired with “to
describe,” as geography,
(as for Eratosthenes, who first calculated the circumference of
the Earth around 240 B.C.E.) to literally measure and give exact scale to the ground, and to spaces
themselves, one smaller and larger than another. So for our virtual political geography, where the
Earth is rerotated again from another center of a space in which it was located, there is an implicit
correspondence between geography and cosmology, the scientific conception of the universe as
well then to cosmograph, the “writing-describing of the universe” and to cosmogram, the “writingimage of the universe.” As a foundation for political science, a diagram of the universe with the
Earth as the center throne is qualitatively different from one that locates it askew among billions
of other illuminated dots. The two diagrams present unlike polities and would require different
rationales to correlate world and image to their logics of governance, and we see the dynamics of
that distinction played out in centuries-long culture wars. Any relationship between geography
and cosmography is also then a relationship between Earth and universe as interrelated domains
and of the boundary distinction between the two, as one contains, delineates, or corrugates the
other. But that boundary between the geographic and the cosmographic is really less a final partition of jurisdictions than a reversible figure-ground interdependence. For an interesting selection
of recent works and commentaries on cosmogrammatic images, see Melik O’Hanian and JeanChristophe Royoux, Cosmograms (Berlin: Sternberg Press, 2005).
34. Maurice Ronai’s semiotics of landscape, “face of the fatherland,” is discussed in Gilles Deleuze
and Félix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 1980).
35. Andrew V. Uroskie, “La jetée en spirale: Robert Smithson’s Stratigraphic Cinema,” Grey Room
19 (spring 2005): 54–79, doi:10.1162/grey.2005.1.19.54.
36. “Robert Smithson: Mapping Dislocations” at the James Cohan Gallery, New York, 2001.
37. Fredric Jameson, Archaeologies of the Future: The Desire Called Utopia and Other Science Fictions
(New York: Verso, 2005), 10–21.

392

Notes

38. See Diedrich Diederichsen and Anselm Franke, The Whole Earth: California and the Disappearance of the Outside (Berlin: Sternberg Press, 2013).
39. I discuss this convoluted relationship between scenographic cosmopolitanism and Google
Earth in my “On Geoscapes and the Google Caliphate: Reflections on the Mumbai Attacks,”
Theory, Culture and Society 26 (2009): 329–342.
40. Consider, for example, Usman Haque’s Sky Ear: “Sky Ear is a non-rigid carbon-fibre ‘cloud,’
embedded with one thousand glowing helium balloons and several dozen mobile phones. The
balloons contain miniature sensor circuits that respond to electromagnetic fields, particularly
those of mobile phones. When activated, the sensor circuits co-ordinate to cause ultra-bright
colored LEDs to illuminate. The 30m cloud glows and flickers brightly as it floats across the sky.”
http://www.haque.co.uk/skyear.php.
41. Mark Dorrian, “On Google Earth,” in New Geographies, 4: Scales of the Earth, ed. El Hadi Jazairy
and Melissa Vaughn (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Graduate School of Design, 2011),
164–170.
42. The question of skin shows up in cultural theory in a variety of ways. In addition to the obvious connotations for theories of race and racism, see also Mark C. Taylor, Hiding (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998); Nicholas de Monchaux, Spacesuit: Fashioning Apollo (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2011); and Peter Sloterdijk, Bubbles: Microspherology, vol. 1: Spheres (Los Angeles:
Semiotext(e), 2011).
43. Paul N. Edwards, A Vast Machine: Computer Models, Climate Data, and the Politics of Global
Warming (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010).
44. Juan Carlos Castilla-Rubio and Simon Willis, “Planetary Skin: A Global Platform for a New
Era of Collaboration,” Cisco internal white paper, March 2009 (no longer online). See now http://
www.planetaryskin.org/.
45. Some descriptive detail from the Planetary Skin website: “It is supported by joint policy programs that extend the model of planetary instrumentalization to the political realm through
open and collaborative, if also expert-piloted, forums. These include theconnectedrepublic.org,
connectedcommons.org and connectedurbandevelopment.org, and it also extends to include
tools for the integration of actors into common parliamentarian media, largely identical to
those in development and deployment under the rubric of E-Government (digitalization of governmental processes) and Government 2.0 (employment of open social media channels and tools
to support self-governance).” The white paper continues, “The Planetary Skin platform can be
thought of as a globally pervasive ‘nervous system,’ assimilating disparate and siloed data sets
held in public and private enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems. It also analyzes data originating from airborne and terrestrial sensor networks located around the world (SensorSpaces).
These, in turn, are connected to a Web 2.0 mashup of decision-support tools (DecisionSpaces).
These tools facilitate proactive management of resources, risks, and new environmental markets,
enabling innovation by private sector entrepreneurs, next-generation regulatory agencies, and
social entrepreneurs (CommonSpaces).”

Notes

393

46. Glenn Beck and Harriet Parke, Agenda 21 (New York: Pocket Books, 2012).
47. Donald A. MacKenzie, An Engine, Not a Camera: How Financial Models Shape Markets (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006).
48. Raymond Depardon and Paul Virilio, Native Land, Stop Eject (Paris: Fondation Cartier pour
l’art contemporain, 2008).
49. See my “What We Do Is Secrete: On Virilio, Planetarity and Data Visualisation,” in Virilio and
Visual Culture, ed. John Armitage and Ryan Bishop (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press,
2013).
50. In his famous interviews with Clare Parnet, Deleuze recounts Jakob von Uexküll’s parable on
the life world of the tick. The tick sits on his perch, all but motionless, waiting. It waits for the
heat of a passerby mammal. Its life world is defined by this sense and reaction: no heat, still; heat,
leap from the branch into the void and perhaps latch onto the warm skin of its new host.
51. As we’ll see in the Cloud and City chapters, data center and fiber-switch installations are an
avant-garde of secret urbanism and subterranean architecture.
52. “The Shannon-Hartley Theorem bounds the maximum rate at which information can be
transmitted over a Gaussian channel in terms of the ratio of the signal to noise power.” Eric Price
and David P. Woodruff, “Applications of the Shannon-Hartley Theorem to Data Streams and
Sparse Recovery,” technical paper, 2012, http://www.cs.utexas.edu/~ecprice/papers/isit.pdf.
53. The smart grid is also a recording medium for the immanent representation of all things,
passing through signification, toward enable an angelic harmony of things. See Sol Yurick, Metatron: The Recording Angel (Los Angeles: Semtiotext(e), 1985).
54. The weight of virtual systems is amplified by the weight of virtual systems that monitor and
mediate virtual systems. Consider the impact of bitcoin and coin mining. The key innovation is
that “the work needed to commit a fraud is set to be higher in electricity costs than the economic
benefit derived from it.” See http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-04-12/virtual-bitcoin
-mining-is-a-real-world-environmental-disaster.html and http://www.computerworld.com.au/
article/458439/cloud_real_ecological_timebomb_wireless_data_centres/.
55. The Singularity born of spam is a plot device in Charles Stross, Rule 34 (New York: Ace, 2011).
56. Mark P. Milles, “The Cloud Begins with Coal,” August 2013, http://www.tech-pundit.com/
wp-content/uploads/2013/07/Cloud_Begins_With_Coal.pdf.
57. Climate Group, “SMART 2020: Enabling the Low Carbon Economy in the Information Age,”
2008, http://www.smart2020.org/_assets/files/02_smart2020Report.pdf.
58. For a taste of that ecstasy, http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/f5228aec-7b36-11e0-9b06
-00144feabdc0.html.
59. See Nick Land, “Lure of the Void, pt. 1,” August 2012, http://www.scribd.com/
doc/242684419/Nick-Land-Lure-of-the-Void#scribd.

394

Notes

60. See Pete Foster, “Cloud Computing—a Green Opportunity or Climate Change Risk?” Guardian, August 18, 2011. http://www.guardian.co.uk/sustainable-business/cloud-computing-climate
-change.
61. On smart grids and data ownership, see Jon Bruner, “Two Crucial Questions for the Smart
Grid,” O’Reilly Radar, November 5, 2012, http://radar.oreilly.com/2012/11/two-crucial-questions
-for-the-smart-grid.html.
62. See Sally Daultrey, “Adaptation on the Roof of the World,” December 30, 2010,
http://designgeopolitics.org/blog/2010/12/adapatation-on-the-roof-of-the-world/.
63. On the Chinese embassy air monitoring issue, see Steven Jiang and Alexis Lai, “China: Haze
Isn’t Foreign Embassies’ Business,” CNN, June 6, 2012. http://www.cnn.com/2012/06/06/world/
asia/china-foreign-embassy-pollution-monitor/index.html.
64. See “Byzantine Perspective on Climate Justice,” New Scientist, May 11, 2011, http://
www.newscientist.com/article/mg21028124.400-byzantine-perspective-on-climate-justice.html.
65. See David G. Victor, Global Warming Gridlock: Creating More Effective Strategies for Protecting the
Planet (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011).
66. See David Basulto, “Roadmap 2050: A Practical Guide to a Prosperous, Low-Carbon Europe,”
ArchDaily, April 13, 2010, http://www.archdaily.com/56229/roadmap-2050-a-practical-guide-to
-a-prosperous-low-carbon-europe/.
67. See Paul Chapman, “Entire Nation of Kiribati to Be Relocated over Rising Sea Level Threat,”
Telegraph, March 7, 2012, http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/australiaandthepacific/
kiribati/9127576/Entire-nation-of-Kiribati-to-be-relocated-over-rising-sea-level-threat.html. I had
the pleasure of seeing Michael Gerrard present this work to an eager audience of architects at
Columbia University’s XLab at an event I helped to organize with Geoff Manaugh and Ed Keller,
Google/Arctic/Mars. At this event we examined how each of the three complicates normative
sovereign geographies and how each might directly compare and inform the others. The event
also hosted Gerrard of the Columbia University Climate Law Center, who represents
the interests of drowning island nations as director of the Sabin Center for Climate Law.
http://web.law.columbia.edu/climate-change.
68. Brian Massumi, “National Enterprise Emergency: Steps Toward an Ecology of Powers,” Theory,
Culture and Society 26, no. 6 (November 2009): 153. He writes, “Dampening accident-amplification is not enough. An alternate growth pattern must be planted on the proto-territory. Fullspectrum power preempts threat by counter-producing its own systemic effects in its stead, in a
supplanting of incipience. Its business is to induce potentially systemic counter-effects through
an alter-emergent incursion of a change-conditioning force of nature. Preemptive power is the
cuckoo in the nest of naturing nature.”
69. See my “Undesigning the Emergency: Against Prophylactic Urban Membranes” (lecture at
O’Reilly ETech 2009, San Jose, CA, March 11, 2009). Williams’s point was that this is precisely
why nanocomputing technologies are absolutely necessary to engineer that computer, not that
comprehensive models are a waste of time.

Notes

395

70. For example, Architecture for Humanity and its book, with perhaps the most self-satisfied
title ever: Kate Stohr, Design like You Give a Damn: Architectural Responses to Humanitarian Crises
(New York: Metropolis Books, 2006).
71. I’m referring here to the work of Bruno Latour to rethink the logics of political inclusion and
exclusion for a modern social theory. In particular, see his address, “Toward a Compositionist
Manifesto,” http://www.bruno-latour.fr/node/140. Tom Cohen, Theory in the Era of Climate
Change (Ann Arbor: Open Humanities Press, 2012), is an excellent appraisal of the complicity and
failure of cultural theory to understand its situation within the historical arc of ecological deterioration and potential catastrophe.
72. A designer at SAP suggested to me that 22 percent of the world’s water is managed by
its software on a daily basis. Warren B. Causey, “Important Issues Water Utilities Face,” February
2, 2011, http://www.sap.com/bin/sapcom/en_us/downloadasset.2011-02-feb-01-08.important
-issues-water-utilities-face-pdf.htm.
73. “The state loves climate change because a schizophrenic nature is the ultimate terrorist
and—as became apparent in New Orleans—militarized police will be needed.” See Massumi,
“National Enterprise Emergency.”
74. Michel Foucault, The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1978—1979 (New
York: Picador, 2010).
75. Freeman J. Dyson, “Search for Artificial Stellar Sources of Infrared Radiation,” Science, June 3,
1960, 1667–1668, doi:10.1126/science.131.3414.166.
76. Charles Stross, Accelerando (New York: Penguin Group, 2005). See also Robert J.
Bradbury, “Matrioshka Brains,” working paper, 1999, http://www.gwern.net/docs/1999-bradbury
-matrioshkabrains.pdf.
77. Nick Bostrom of the Oxford Institute for the Future of Humanity imagines that computational megastructures of this scale and capacity would even be capable of supporting full-scale
simulations of entire worlds and if that is so, perhaps our reality is already being powered by such
a machine. Bostrom, “Are We Living in a Computer Simulation?” Philosophical Quarterly 53
(2003).

Cloud Layer
1. Alexandre Kojève, “Outline of a Doctrine of French Policy,” 1945, Paris, https://www
.marxists.org/reference/subject/philosophy/works/fr/kojeve2.htm.
2. Thomas Jefferson, The Papers of Thomas Jefferson (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1950).
3. Aristophanes, The Clouds, trans. William Arrowsmith (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 1962).

396

Notes

4. See Benjamin H. Bratton, “Interview by Metahaven,” October 2011, http://www.bratton.info/
projects/texts/interview-by-metahaven/, and “The Cloud, the State, and the Stack: Metahaven in
Conversation with Benjamin Bratton,” December 16, 2012, http://mthvn.tumblr.com/
post/38098461078/thecloudthestateandthestack.
5. See http://urbanizationproject.org/blog/charter-cities. Charter Cities represents a plan to introduce new legal frameworks for new or existing cities, turning them into a parallel to Special Economic Zones, here Special Political Zones. New York University economist Paul Romer is a leading
advocate for the vision.
6. See this discussion of Gelernter’s influence on the conceptual development of the Cloud:
David Gelernter, John Markoff, and Clay Shirky, “Lord of the Cloud,” Edge, April 29, 2009,
http://edge.org/conversation/lord-of-the-cloud. For a sense of Gelernter’s political conservatism,
see http://www.nationalreview.com/author/david-gelernter.
7. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_time.
8. Sun Microsystems’ old tagline, “the network is the computer” has been realized, especially if
the definition of network is expanded to include both the physical computing network and the
network of users providing content and feedback.
9. See Stu Woo, “Welcome to Amazon Town,” Wall Street Journal, December 20, 2011,
http://online.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052970204058404577108821485438232.
10. I refer to Google’s mission statement: “to organize the world’s information and make it universally accessible and useful.” See https://www.google.com/about/company.
11. China Mieville, The City and the City (New York: Del Rey Ballantine Books, 2009).
12. John Battelle calls this “the government layer.” He writes, “We are increasingly going to
the Web/Internet as the platform for our lives. There, our identity is not managed by the
government. It’s managed—in the majority—by Facebook. When we buy things, our identity is
managed by PayPal, Amazon, and Amex/Visa/Mastercard, not to mention a raft of pretenders to
our identity throne, including Facebook, Google, and startups like Square. All of these are private
corporations. None of them ask us for our government issued identity cards before allowing us to
make a purchase. Some do ask for our SSN, of course. But online, the ‘government layer’ is
melting into the background of our identity—rather like DOS melted into the background of
Windows 3. I expect this to be the source of some serious conflict in the coming decade(s).” See
John Battelle, “What Role Government?” John Battelle’s Search Blog, November 4, 2011, http://
battellemedia.com/archives/2011/11/what-role-government.php.
13. See Jin Ge, “The Father of China’s Great Firewall Re-defines Internet Sovereignty,”
http://www.88-bar.com/tag/sovereign-internet/. Thanks to Tricia Wang for alerting me to this
quote.
14. See Xu Wu, Chinese Cyber Nationalism: Evolution, Characteristics, and Implications (Lanham,
MD: Lexington Books, 2007).
15. R. Buckminster Fuller, Grunch of Giants (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1983).

Notes

397

16. Katie Fehrenbacher, “Google Floats Idea of Wave Powered Data Center,” Gigaom, September
8, 2008, https://gigaom.com/2008/09/08/google-floats-idea-of-wave-powered-data-center/, and
“Google to Switch on Seawater-Cooled Data Center This Fall,” Gigaom, May 24, 2011, https://
gigaom.com/2011/05/24/google-to-switch-on-worlds-first-seawater-cooled-data-center-this-fall/.
On the speculative geography of oceanic architectures for Cloud systems, in this case HFT, see
“Islands at the Speed of Light,” BLDGBLOG (blog), March 30, 2011, http://bldgblog.blogspot
.com/2011/03/islands-at-speed-of-light.html. Pay particular attention to the notion of “aircraft
carriers as networked archipelagos.”
17. See Larry Digran “Google Wins Floating Data Center Patent,” April 30, 2009, http://www.
zdnet.com/blog/btl/google-wins-floating-data-center-patent/: “It can be beneficial to distribute
computing power closer to users. As such, data centers may be moved closer to users, with relevant content sent from a central facility out to regional data centers only once, and further transmissions occurring over shorter regional links. As a result, every request from a user need not
result in a transmission cross-country and through the Internet backbone; network activity may
be more evenly balanced and confined to local areas.”
18. Cisco proudly estimated the number of “things” connected to the Internet of Things as 50
billion by 2020. See Dave Evans, “The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the Internet
Is Changing Everything,” April 2011, https://www.cisco.com/web/about/ac79/docs/innov/
IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf. To say nothing of the more or less charted waters of the Dark Net,
accessible only through tools like the Tor browser.
19. But as Jameson notes, it is the irregularity of opposing forces that breaks down the order of
the nomos: “With the religious wars, but perhaps also the English dominance of the sea—now
leads to the Westphalian system of nation-states, in which, for the first time, the new nomos of
state equality and friend-foe emerges. The friend-foe opposition is possible, indeed, only between
equals: it includes Hegelian recognition, except that whereas Hegelian struggle aims to produce
recognition, Schmitt’s version is enabled only after mutual recognition is secured. The individual
analogy is with the duel.” Fredric Jameson, “Notes on the Nomos,” South Atlantic Quarterly 104
(2005): 199–204, doi:10.1215/00382876-104-2-199.
20. See Cornelia Vismann and Markus Krajewski, “Computer Juridisms,” Grey Room, no. 29 (Fall
2007): 90–109, doi:10.1162/grey.2007.1.29.90.
21. Or perhaps less, given that Beijing has put rain under some measure of control, such as
cloudbusting efforts just before the Beijing Olympics in 2008. More prosaic, Android is the most
popular mobile operating system in China, but many versions in wide use are so forked that neither Google nor the Chinese central authorities can control or capitalize it directly. One solution
proposed by the latter is COS (China Operating System) a linux based OS that could reduce reliance on “American” code. See http://www.china-cos.com/.
22. That back doors allowing for espionage are to be found in both United States and Chinese
routers should surprise no one, least of all Cisco or Huawei. For this reason both countries have
severely curtailed the importation and official purchase of one another’s equipment. See http://
www.reuters.com/article/2015/02/27/us-china-tech-exclusive-idUSKBN0LV08720150227.

398

23. Ryan Arsenault, “Weird Data Center Locations,” TechTarget,
searchdatacenter.techtarget.com/feature/Weird-Data-Center-Locations.

Notes

April

2010,

http://

24. Roger E. Bohn and James E. Short, “How Much Information? 2009 Report on American
Consumers,” December 2009, http://hmi.ucsd.edu/pdf/HMI_2009_ConsumerReport_Dec9_2009
.pdf.
25. This does not stop dedicated researchers from trying to develop maps of the Internet that are
as comprehensive as possible. At the University of California, San Diego, the San Diego Supercomputer Center’s Cooperative Association for Internet Data Analysis has developed multiple
ways to render Internet geographies and geometries. See “Walrus-Gallery: Visualization and Navigation,” Center for Applied Internet Data Analysis, http://www.caida.org/tools/visualization/
walrus/gallery1/. The site submarinecablemap.com provides what it says it does. Recently a
project called Internet Census 2012 by “Carna Botnet” used bots to scan IP version 4 space
in a way that is more effective than legal. See Carna Botnet, Internet Census 2012, 2012, http://
internetcensus2012.bitbucket.org/paper.html.
26. See the white paper studies by Cisco: “The Zettabyte Era: Trends and Analysis,” June
10, 2014, http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/service-provider/visual-networking
-index-vni/VNI_Hyperconnectivity_WP.pdf, and “Cisco Global Cloud Index: Forecast and
Methodology, 2013–2018” http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/service-provider/
global-cloud-index-gci/Cloud_Index_White_Paper.pdf.
27. For a basic definition and explanation, see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polarization
-division_multiplexing.
28. See Eric Price and David P. Woodruff, “Applications of the Shannon-Hartley Theorem to Data
Streams and Sparse Recovery,” 2012, retrieved from IBM Watson researcher site May 8, 2015,
http://researcher.watson.ibm.com/researcher/files/us-dpwoodru/pw12.pdf.
29. For the OptIPuter project, for example, each major component could be on a different
continent, but they all work together as if it were a single self-contained machine. See http://
www.optiputer.net/.
30. See, for example, Steven Levy, “Going with the Flow: Google’s Secret Switch to the Next
Wave of Networking,” Wired, April 17, 2012, http://www.wired.com/2012/04/going-with
-the-flow-google/ and James C. Corbett, Jeffrey Dean, Michael Epstein, Andrew Fikes, Christopher
Frost, JJ Furman, Sanjay Ghemawat, Andrey Gubarev, Christopher Heiser, Peter Hochschild,
Wilson Hsieh, Sebastian Kanthak, Eugene Kogan, Hongyi Li, Alexander Lloyd, Sergey Melnik,
David Mwaura, David Nagle, Sean Quinlan, Rajesh Rao, Lindsay Rolig, Yasushi Saito, Michal Szymaniak, Christopher Taylor, Ruth Wang, and Dale Woodford, “Spanner: Google’s GloballyDistributed Database,” technical paper, October 2012, http://static.googleusercontent.com/
media/research.google.com/en/us/archive/spanner-osdi2012.pdf.
31. As a Cloud Polis model, Google Fiber would allow the platform to provide the line as well as
the service, as well as software to optimize the line as the physical layer of that platform.

Notes

399

32. The Dutch East India Company’s licensed proto-sovereignty is perhaps the most obvious
historical example.
33. See Tom McCarthy, “Palestine Now Recognised by Greater Power Than US or Israel—Google,”
Guardian, May 3, 2013, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/may/03/google-palestine
-palestinian-territories. See also Greg Kumparak, “Google Palestine Hacked and Defaced through
a Domain Registry Attack,” TechCrunch, August 26, 2013, http://techcrunch.com/2013/08/26/
google-palestine-hacked-and-defaced-seemingly-through-a-domain-registry-attack/.
34. As claimed in cases such as the Megaupload raids whereby USA federal authorities claimed
transoceanic jurisdiction and seized the propertly of CEO Kim Dotcom in his New Zealand residence and place of business. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seizure_of_Megaupload.
35. See James C. Scott, Seeing like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition
Have Failed (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1998), as well as Bruno Latour, “How to Think
like a State” (lecture at the WRR Scientific Council for Government Policy, The Hague, November
22, 2007), http://www.bruno-latour.fr/sites/default/files/P-133-LA%20HAYE-QUEEN.pdf.
36. We see this transposition of the state into the Cloud quite literally in Estonia’s efforts to
secure a full “back-up” of the country’s data, in case of (Russian) cyberattack. The plan calls for
the distribution of “data embassies” in different parts of the world so that if the country’s systems
were compromised or erased that could be restored from a comprehensive remote backup. See
http://www.economist.com/news/technology-quarterly/21645505-protect-itself-attack-estonia
-finding-ways-back-up-its-data-how.
37. An awkward-at-best vision of this at the scale of an entire nation might look like UK Prime
Minister David Cameron’s Big Society initiative, which sought to “integrate the free market with
a theory of social solidarity based on hierarchy and voluntarism,” or in other words, offload state
services onto local charities wrapped in words like “social media” and “decentralization.” See
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Society.
38. Or even agents well beyond that government’s borders, as today much of the US federal
government data entry is done in India.
39. See the US data.gov and the UK’s data.gov.uk (overseen by World Wide Web inventor Sir Tim
Berners-Lee) as very curtailed and limited examples of this federal information transparency.
40. This refers to Robert Nozick’s notorious economic libertarian manifesto, Anarchy, State
and Utopia (New York: Basic Books, 1974), where he introduces the conceptual ideal of the
minimal state. See also Methaven’s “ultraminimal state” and its Facestate project: Andrea Hyde,
“Metahaven’s Facestate,” Walker Art Center, December 13, 2011, http://www.walkerart.org/
magazine/2011/metahavens-facestate.
41. The confusion this sows is readily apparent in both attempts to curtail Google under the
rubric of a trust “monopoly” and in the awkward rationales for why Google is actually not a
monopoly. See judicial “originalist” Robert Bork’s back-bending “What Does the Chicago School
Teach About Internet Search and the Antitrust Treatment of Google,” Robert H. Bork and J.
Gregory Sidak, Journal of Competition Law & Economics 8 (2012): 663–700.

400

Notes

42. In a way, geopolitical reality is only catching up with the anticipations of the science fiction
that has already explored the proliferation and institutionalization of data havens and data infrastructures, “community clouds,” cloud-based microreligions and macrostates, and others. I
believe that Bruce Sterling coined the term data haven in his 1989 novel, Islands in the Net, and
Neal Stephenson developed the notion closer to the normalization of an emergent political geography in Snow Crash (1992), in which characters pop in and out of passport-granting microstates,
not bound to specific lands but instead distributed on street corners like 7-11s (the protagonist
frequents one of these known as Mr. Lee’s Hong Kong). Later in Stephenson’s sprawling Cryptonomicon, the transhistorical plot stretches from Alan Turing’s war years to the present day and
locates a data haven in the fictional country of Kinatua, located between Borneo and the Philippines (domain .kk). In the real world, HavenCo operated from the self-declared sovereignty of the
oil platforms of Sealand, while Freenet, a distributed encrypted network, tries to support a secured
flow of information over public and private lines. While new micromodels of civil (or uncivil)
society may well emerge from these miscellaneous jurisdictional folds and seams within the legal
and extralegal geographical fabrics of globalization, they also couch and host the darkest repercussions of the tooth-and-claw libertarianism on which some are founded. For example, the US
Federal Trade Commission recently shut down 3FN, a company based in Belize, which had run a
lucrative business based largely the hosting and distribution of spam, malware, spyware, and,
more disturbing, hundreds of gigabytes of images and videos of child sexual abuse. The street
finds a way. However, unlike these interstitial pirate “free-zones,” the global platforms of Cloud
Polis are not a confederation of alternative tactics. To the contrary, they are the normative architecture from which the exception bends.
43. The relevant passage reads, “Management of Identification resources, 31B 3A.2 Member
States shall have equal rights to manage the Internet, including in regard to the allotment, assignment and reclamation of Internet numbering, naming, addressing and identification resources
and to support for the operation and development of basic Internet infrastructure.” See McTim,
“It’s Not Paranoia If They Are Really After You!” CircleID (blog), December 9, 2012, http://
www.circleid.com/posts/20121209_it_is_not_paranoia_if_they_are_really_after_you/.
44. We might take this in the sense of “constituent” and “constitutive” violence as described in
Walter Benjamin, “The Critique of Violence,” in Reflections Essays, Aphorisms, Autobiographical
Writings, ed. Peter Demetz (New York: Schocken Books, 1986), 277–300.
45. Consider how Iraqi insurgent groups managed to tap into coalition surveillance and communication satellites as well as aerial drone camera feeds using the Russian off-the-shelf software,
SkyGrabber, which sells for $26. See Charles Arthur, “SkyGrabber: The $26 Software Used by
Insurgents to Hack into US Drones,” Guardian, December 17, 2009, http://www.theguardian
.com/technology/2009/dec/17/skygrabber-software-drones-hacked.
46. Umberto Eco, “The Holy War: Mac vs. DOS, La bustina di Minerva,” L’Espresso, September 30,
1994. See also http://cliffarnold.com/macvdos.pdf.
47. There are certainly other Cloud platforms to consider as possible Cloud Polis models, and certainly not nearly all of them are US megaplatforms. A word on Twitter, which I view as too onedimensional to compare to the others’ more grandiose geopolitical potentials: It may be better

Notes

401

compared to a critical insect species in a larger ecology, moving memes from place to place, like
bees pollinating flowers. It never builds more than simple clusters on its own, but without it,
more complex architectures would decay. For some time, I’ve argued that Twitter mustn’t overlook the nonhuman user base and that its potential as a universal platform for the Internet of
Things may prove an equally important function as human-human threads.
48. See, for example, Erving Goffman’s seminal The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (Garden
City, NY: Doubleday, 1959).
49. See Doug Beaver, “10 Billion Photos,” Facebook, October 14, 2008, https://www.facebook.
com/notes/facebook-engineering/10-billion-photos/30695603919.
50. Unsurprisingly then, Cloud network platforms have hired many of the best social network
analysis away from academia. For example, during my time at Yahoo! I worked with small-worlds
network pioneer Duncan Watts, formerly of Columbia’s Department of Sociology and now at
Microsoft Research.
51. Company founder Mark
Facebook’s closure from the
Facebook-centric version for
“Drones Beaming Web Access
http://nyti.ms/1GpPOXh.

Zuckerberg may have found a way around the problem of
open Internet, and that is to implement a proprietary aerial
the developing world. See Quentin Hardy and Vindu Goel,
Art in the Stars for Facebook,” New York Times, March 26, 2015,

52. See http://chatroulette.com/ if you must.
53. I particularly like the premise considered in Charles Stross’s novel Rule 34 (New York: Ace
Books, 2011), that “the singularity” is born from the accumulation of global e-mail spam becoming sentient.
54. See Cory Doctorow’s novelization of gold farmers’ plight and struggle in For the Win (New
York: Tor, 2010).
55. David Graeber’s Debt: The First 5000 Years (New York: Melville Publishing, 2011) revived
popular interest in debt as primary in the social ontology of money. See also Marcel Mauss’s The
Gift (originally published in 1925), which remains a reference for the anthropology of finance,
Marcel Mauss and E. E. Evans-Pritchard. The Gift: Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic Societies (New York: Norton, 1967).
56. It’s perhaps easy to underestimate Apple’s scale and position. Apple generated $43.7 billion
in sales during the first three months of 2014. That’s more than Google, Amazon, and Facebook
combined. Apple now has 800 million iTunes accounts. That’s 800 million credit cards on file,
which is more than any other company in the world. As of this writing, Apple has $150.6
billion in cash. It could buy Facebook at Facebook’s current valuation with its cash. Or it could
go on a shopping spree and buy Netflix, Tesla, Twitter, Dropbox, Pandora, and Spotify. When
it was done buying those companies, it would still have $59 billion in cash to spend on
anything else it wants. See http://www.businessinsider.com/mind-blowing-facts-about-apple
-2014-4?op 1#ixzz30L3YYeDJ.

402

Notes

57. In this famous TV advertisement aired only once—during the 1984 Super Bowl—a young
rebel representing Apple hurls “a torch of freedom” into the screens on which the face of “IBM”
drones on. The promise is that with Apple’s new colorful day, 1984 (the year) will not be like
1984, the Orwellian dystopia. If the reader is unfamiliar with the advertisement, its Wikipedia
page will explain its significance: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1984_%28advertisement%29.
58. See Fred Turner, From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth Network,
and the Rise of Digital Utopianism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006). For an example of
Limbaugh’s Apple love see http://www.rushlimbaugh.com/search/?query apple&go.x -299&go
.y -365&go go. For a unusual and interesting take on Jobs and Wozniak’s early relationship, see
the Steve & Steve comic, http://www.steve-and-steve.com/.
59. “What then is an object? In the literal sense it is: ‘that which has been thrown or which one
throws in front.’ Are world-objects lying in front of us? The global dimension that characterizes
them eliminates the distance between us and them which in the past defined objects. We now
live in those world-objects as we live in the world.” From Michael Serres, “Revisiting the Natural
Contract,” trans. Anne-Marie Feenburg-Dibon, CTheory, May 11, 2006, http://www.ctheory.net/
articles.aspx?id 515.).
60. For more on the urbanism of these hubs in the City chapter, see John D. Kasarda and Greg
Lindsay, Aerotropolis: The Way We’ll Live Next (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011).
61. See Farhad Manjoo, “I Want It Today: How Amazon’s Ambitious New Push for SameDay Delivery Will Destroy Local Retail,” Slate, http://www.slate.com/articles/business/small
_business/2012/07/amazon_same_day_delivery_how_the_e_commerce_giant_will_destroy_local
_retail_.html.
62. As this book was going to press, Google announced that it would create a parent company
called Alphabet, with many experimental initiatives moving outside of Google proper. It is not
known how the reorganization will impact or revitalize the company’s founding mission, but
the reader should infer that “Google” refers here to all ventures included within the Alphabet
enterprise.
63. A typically simplistic and misinformed example is Shoshanna Zuboff’s thought piece, “Dark
Google” in Frankfurter Allgemeine, April 30, 2014, http://www.faz.net/aktuell/feuilleton/debatten/
the-digital-debate/shoshanna-zuboff-dark-google-12916679.html. We are provided with several
of the most shrill and counterproductive tropes of Google bashing: taking what Eric Schmidt says
in op-eds at face value as representing Google’s strategy, or, worse, as representing Google’s geopolitical and geoeconomic significance, power, or danger; conflating user feedback and pushback
regarding strange new forms of data transparency with some deliberate and explicitly criminal
mischief on Google’s part, including misrepresentation of what practices were and are secret and
which are merely unusual and controversial; insisting that confusion about the ambiguous social
logics of secrecy and privacy in a network society is proof not merely of disenchantment but of
innocence betrayed by bad actors; insisting that the inability to articulate a coherent political
description of Cloud-based social systems is demonstrable proof, not just of a general confusion,
but of Google’s willful violence; insisting that the only way to adjudicate these new Googly

Notes

403

conundrums is with new language and analytical tools. (The next five sentences then repeat the
oldest and most conventional calls for general well-being through measured oversight.) By comparison Assange’s When Google Met Wikileaks is a fascinating, self-contradictory, hyperactive
tangle of ideas, accusations, and bizarre rationalizations. Within critical Google discourse it is in a
league of its own, for both better or worse. Julian Assange, When Google Met Wikileaks (New York:
OR Books, 2014).
64. See Julian Assange, “The Banality of ‘Don’t Be Evil,’” New York Times, June 1, 2013,
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/02/opinion/sunday/the-banality-of-googles-dont-be-evil.html
It was later republished in Assange, When WikiLeaks Met Google.
65. As recently occurred in Turkey, when the AK Party tried to shut down Twitter, and the
government also tried to shut off access to Google DNS as well. Steven Carstensen,
“Google’s Public DNS Intercepted in Turkey,” Google Online Security Blog, March 29, 2014, http://
googleonlinesecurity.blogspot.com/2014/03/googles-public-dns-intercepted-in-turkey.html.
66. A current line of my research looks at convergences of machine sensing and animal sensation. The larger domain of “search” underwrites both and sometimes enables that convergence.
67. Yann Moulier Boutang and Ed Emery, Cognitive Capitalism (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2011).
68. Pasquinelli writes on this conjunction within Google’s algorithmic phylum: “First and foremost Google’s power is understood from the perspective of value production (in different forms:
attention value, cognitive value, network value, etc.): the biopolitical consequences of its data
monopoly come logically later.” Matteo Pasquinelli, “Google’s PageRank Algorithm: A Diagram
of the Cognitive Capitalism and the Rentier of the Common Intellect,” in Deep Search: The Politics
of Search beyond Google, ed. Konrad Becker and Felix Stalder (Innsbruck: Studien Verlag, 2009).
69. For example, a recent deal for 100 megawatts of wind energy from developers in the
US Midwest. See Poornima Gupta, “Google to Use Wind Energy to Power Data Centers,”
Reuters, July 20, 2010, http://www.reuters.com/article/2010/07/20/us-google-windpower
-idUSTRE66J3BL20100720.
70. Bernard Stiegler develops from Gilbert Simonden a far more subtle theoretical application of
epiphylogenesis. See his Technics and Time, 1: The Fault of Epimetheus (Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 1998).
71. See, for example, Eric Pfanner, “Debunking Rumors of an Internet Takeover,” New York Times,
June 11, 2012, http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/11/technology/debunking-rumors-of-an
-internet-takeover.html. See also Michael J. Gross, “World War 3.0,” Vanity Fair, May 2012,
http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2012/05/internet-regulation-war-sopa-pipa-defcon-hacking.
72. See Google’s quasi-astroturf response to the ITU proposal: http://www.google.com/intl/en/
takeaction/whats-at-stake/.
73. The joke goes something like this, “Mencius Moldbug and Alexander Dugin walk into a
bar …”

404

Notes

74. Saskia Sassen, Territory, Authority, Rights: From Medieval to Global Assemblages (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 2008).

City Layer
1. Jean-Luc Godard, Deux ou trois choses que je sais d’elle (Paris: Anouchka Films/ Argos Films/ Les
Films du Carrose/ Parc Film, 1967).
2. Italo Calvino, Invisible Cities (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1974).
3. Gilles Deleuze, Pourparlers: 1972–1990 (Paris: Editions De Minuit, 1990).
4. The term “junkspace” refers to Rem Koolhaas’ essay on the poverty of contemporary environments. See October 100 (Spring 2002): 175–190.
5. Sanford Kwinter, “Digital Pleistocene” (seminar syllabus, Mediascapes program, SCI-Arc,
summer 2008). See https://mediascapes.wikispaces.com/DigitalPleistocene.
6. A positive spin on this dual attention is suggested by Elie During, “Loose Coexistence: Techologies of Attention in the Age of the Post-Metropolis,” in Cognitive Architecture: From Biopolitics to
Noopolitics: Architecture and Mind in the Age of Communication and Information, ed. Deborah Hauptmann and Warren Neidich (Rotterdam: Uitgeverij 010, 2010).
7. Andrea Branzi, No-Stop City: Archizoom Associati (Orleans: HYX, 2006).
8. Kazys Varnelis, “Programming after Program: Archizoom’s No-Stop City,” Praxis: Journal of
Writing and Building, May 18, 2006, 82–91.
9. Diedrich Diederichsen and Anselm Franke, eds., The Whole Earth California and the Disappearance of the Outside (Berlin: Sternberg Press, 2013).
10. The term right to the city comes from Henri Lefebvre, who developed an urban materialism
quite different from the one described here, though not necessarily incompatible with it.
11. Steven Graham and Simon Marvin identified this tunnel effect in their Splintering Urbanism:
Networked Infrastructures, Technological Mobilities and the Urban Condition (London: Routledge,
2001). Among these is the centralization of key bandwidth hubs, often, but not always, in tier 1
global cities linking their trading centers to one another and further accelerating forces consolidating capital into fewer megacenters where it can be efficiently leveraged. Whereas in the dotcom era, some pundits emphasized how information technologies would soon virtualize
economic contact and usher in a new era of cybersuburbs (and to an extent it has, but not by
hollowing out urban cores as some enthused it would). See William J. Mitchell, City of Bits: Space,
Place, and the Infobahn (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995), and Joel Kotkin, The New Geography:
How the Digital Revolution Is Reshaping the American Landscape (New York: Random House, 2000).
It is now clear that while planetary-scale computation does virtualize some kinds of places, its
real project, it turns out, is the terraforming of continental interfaces with ferocious effect. In this
large-scale bandwidth, provision and access becomes a core spatial planning strategy, whether for

Notes

405

small market cities like Kansas City, Missouri, the first test bed for Google’s 100 megabyte fiber
network, or for large market actors like traders who relocate their offices farther down the island
in Manhattan to get closer to the central switches on Wall Street and shave nanoseconds
off high-speed trading cycles. Despite its global spread and horizontal ubiquity, for Stack urbanism, proximity to the center, as defined by supermassive concentrations of bit flows, is seen
as essential.
12. See David Kusner, “The Real Story of Stuxnet,” IEEE Spectrum, February 23, 2013,
http://spectrum.ieee.org/telecom/security/the-real-story-of-stuxnet.
13. As well as simulations of all of these, as evidenced by the imaginary ISIS attack on Louisiana
as invented by Russian mischief makers. See Cory Doctorow, “Imaginary ISIS Attack on Louisiana
and the Twitterbots Who Loved It,” http://boingboing.net/2015/03/08/imaginary-isis-attack
-on-louis.html.
14. The shock and awe of military/entertainment programs is by no means exclusive to airports,
but as an urban type, they are perhaps most decisively dependent on its effects. On the one hand,
the airport is a liminal space of territorial and jurisdictional transition, and so available to exceptional policing actions. On the other, airport urbanism is the absolutely normal essence of what
the City layer is and does, and because of this symbolic miniaturization of the world at large, it is
so useful as a target for political violence (and so available to exceptional policing actions).
15. The Foucauldian disciplinary model describes a mode of spatial power predicated on the
securing of subjects in place (securing a negative freedom of movement and a positive freedom
from movement).
16. The problematics and potential of the urban operating system are well articulated by Matthew Fuller and Usman Haque in Urban Versioning System v.1.0, Situated Technologies Pamphlet
series, 2008, http://www.situatedtechnologies.net/. The conflicts involved, however, are impossible to tally in real time. In their book Cypherpunks: Freedom and the Future of the Internet, Julian
Assange, Jacob Appelbaum, and Andy Muller-Maguhn are alarmed that “Siemens is marketing a
platform for intelligence agencies that does actually produce automated actions. So when target
A is within a certain number of meters of target B according to their mobile intercept records, and
target A receives an email mentioning something—a keyword—then an action is triggered.” For
them the User-versus-Cloud arms race is tilted by the widespread use of cryptographic systems
(including perhaps the Cryptophone, http://www.cryptophone.de/en/products/mobile/). One
lesson from the Snowden affair was that the cryptographic and anonymizing tools (like Tor
browser) may increase the likelihood that the User will be a tracked target of surveillance. See
Dan Goodin, “Use of Tor and E-mail Crypto Could Increase Chances that NSA Keeps Your Data,”
http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2013/06/use-of-tor-and-e-mail-crypto-could-increase
-chances-that-nsa-keeps-your-data/. For one, much of the tracking involves the reconstruction of
metadata about the network of Users communicating instead of the more laborious cracking of
individual messages, and so encrypting only content provides no additional privacy. Second, the
National Security Agency seems to have decided that Tor users, for whom an IP address cannot be
confidently located within the United States, are presumed not to be US citizens, and so

406

Notes

not covered by federal legal protection. The argument then is that only when everyone uses
cryptographic and anonymizing tools their use no longer places a target on the back of those
who do. See Assange, et al., Cypherpunks: Freedom and the Future of the Internet (New York: OR
Books, 2012).
17. See William Gibson’s Sprawl trilogy novel Mona Lisa Overdrive (Toronto: Bantam Books,
1988), and MVRDV’s drafting of “cyberspace” in Metacity/Datatown (Rottterdam: 010 Publishers) (1999).
18. Also MVRDV KM3: Excursions on Capacity (Barcelona: Actar, 2006).
19. Adam Greenfield, Against the Smart City (New York: Do Projects, 2013).
20. See Patrik Schumacher’s evolving parametricist manifestos that list many of his key claims on
behalf his understanding of this design methodology: “Parametricism as Style—Parametricist
Manifesto,” 2008, http://www.patrikschumacher.com/Texts/Parametricism%20as%20Style.htm.
21. Keller Easterling discusses this consultant-driven urbanism in The Action Is the Form: Victor
Hugo’s TED Talk (London: Strelka Press, 2012).
22. We are left to wonder who the real architects of the architecture actually are: Zaha Hadid,
Cisco, or McKinsey? Shall we now acknowledge the collaborations with more transparency,
and in doing so expand the landscape of parameters that can be admitted into a Luhmannian
design strategy? See also Sam Jaco, “Where Cities Talk to Money,” Domus, no. 970, June 19, 2013,
http://www.domusweb.it/en/architecture/2013/06/10/where_cities_talktomoney.html.
23. See J. G. Ballard, Super-Cannes (New York: Picador, 2001), a novel of seething, barely suppressed mayhem, set in an exclusive technology park enclave.
24. Greenfield, Against the Smart City.
25. The urban armatures of Masdar City are in some places raised off the ground like server racks
in a data center, allowing the replacement of components’ building parts to be done quickly from
backstage.
26. Gilbert Simondon, a French philosopher, sees the individual as a process—through individuation rather than as fixed entity. Neither matter nor form is fixed, as they too go through a process of development. See Simondon’s The Individual and Its Physico-Biological Individuation;
L’individu et sa genese
̀ physico-biologique (Paris: University Presses of France, 1964); and Du mode
d’existence des objets techniques (Paris: Aubier, 1989). On Agamben’s take on the apparatus, see
Giorgio Agamben, What Is an Apparatus? And Other Essays (Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press, 2009). Deleuze offered a strikingly different interpretation of Foucault’s dispositif in his
“What Is a Dispositif?” in Michel Foucault: Philosopher, ed. T. J. Armstrong (Hemel Hempstead:
Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1992), 159–168.
27. Agamben makes extensive use of such theo-politico-etymological binaries to push his arguments forward, for example, his well-known, “Anthropological Machine,” which differentiates
humans from animals according to their inclusion or exclusion from political representability.
See his The Open: Man and Animal (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2004).

Notes

407

28. I use the American program to indicate both architectural programme (in British English) and
computational program. It is precisely the promiscuous ambiguity between one and the other
that I wish to convey. After the appearance of the computer but before the mobile phone, Reyner
Banham called for a revolution in the technologization of the environment, a complete folding
of architectural and cybernetic programs. Reyner Banham, “Architecture after 1960,” Architectural
Review 127 (1960): 253–260. See also Anthony Vidler, “Toward a Theory of Architectural Program,” October 106 (2003): 59–74. For a fascinating discussion of the role of program as a technique of provocation in the late-1970s architectural avant-garde, see Rem Koolhaas and Bernard
Tschumi, “Two Architects 10 Questions on Program Rem Koolhaas Bernard Tschumi,” Praxis 8:
Journal of Writing and Building, May 18, 2006.
29. It may be a matter of debate whether for parametricism that a shift away from representation
is at work, or whether the style has introduced a formal vocabulary for the indexical expression of
fast finance in building form. Schumacher, however, may not find this such a problem. See “I Am
Trying to Imagine a Radical Free Market Urbanism: Conversation between Peter Eisenman and
Patrik Schumacher,” Log 28 (Summer 2013). However, this is not the only perspective available.
Luciana Parisi has outlined a more promising alternative grammar of algorithmic thought and
practice in contrast to deterministic homeostasis and formal closure in her Contagious Architecture: Computation, Aesthetics, and Space (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013). Instead, (through her
reading of Alfred North Whitehead) architecture is staged as a mereotopology of points, parts,
and wholes, and put into motion by algorithmic machines toward open-ended, ultimately contingent and indeterminate cascades of formation, information, and deformation. It overflows the
authority of a given designer, design, or transactional urban context, and in this way, algorithmic
“thought” escapes from stylistic, methodological, or economic strategic fields and becomes an
alien machinic irruption into urban fabric according to its own self-directed aesthetic and procedural programs. The torsion between individual points resolving continuous surfaces and the
mutualism between the smooth and the striated (the work of parametricism) as a platform logic
refocuses attention on the agency of envelopes and surficial complexities to mediate those programs. This serves the critical path of connection between the larger career of algorithmic operation in The Stack and the agency of the line, envelope, and epidermis to organize its effects.
30. Alejandro Zaera-Polo, “The Politics of the Envelope,” Volume 17 (November 2008): 76–105.
31. Without rehearsing Zaera-Polo’s entire schema here, suffice that he focuses on four envelope
types (flat-horizontal, spherical, flat-vertical, and vertical) and the types of polities they configure. The flat-horizontal envelope, such as a very large airport, stadium, or big box retail, organizes
flow into artificial environments; the spherical, which dislodges representation and function and
has the most to offer for the presentation of building facility; the flat-vertical, which presents a
sectional diagram, organized tessellation, and segmentation of public and private at the plinth;
and the vertical, which works at a much larger perceptual scale and organizes variation within a
projection of power.
32. Zaera-Polo’s schema is meant to index the architectural envelope’s status quo and provides
terms of speculation on what it might do differently. He concludes that we think of the politics
of the envelope as a set of possible strategic maneuvers and tactical tricks that can be insinuated

408

Notes

into projects as a supplement to a client’s conservative plans, but which can restructure spatial
publics in ways to which he may not be attentive and incapable of perceiving. For him, while his
politics of the envelope is pragmatist design within the presumed formats of capital cultures,
modulations in the envelope might constitute a transformation in the possible enrollment of
publics and of the urban-scale diagram of their configuration, and thereby a new political ecology of things and people. We can certainly add to his index as needed and expand it perhaps to
include the scope of interfaces accounted for as The Stack. What about the megacity slums and
shanties that are arguably the dominant urban typology of our era? Would their envelope be the
flopping door, a shifting envelope as unclear as the barriers between legal and alegal occupation?
Is the whole favela one vast shared envelope, or should we look instead at each individual construction? Should we assume that its politics of the envelope can be deduced by measuring operations at the aggregate scale or the individual? To add a fifth wall to the taxonomy, we might also
nominate the elongated wedge, exemplified by the US border fence, the Israeli security barrier,
parts of the Berlin Wall, or any of the hundreds of similar geopolitical membranes that have
appeared in recent years. It is, in some ways, our moment’s most characteristic political envelope,
and at least as much as the original four typologies, its spatial, political performance is guaranteed by an animal physicality irrespective of whatever ideological symbolism may accompany
that concrete posture’s purpose. The elongated wedge represented aspires to be an ideal envelope
cleaving an absolute inside and outside, without hosting any regular interior program within
itself, diluted by no perforation (the bunker and the camp depend on the wedge-like envelope
but also host human habitation within them, one for protective exclusion the other for protective inclusion).
33. Some updated version of Perec’s typologies, perhaps? Georges Perec, Species of Spaces (Melbourne: West Space, 2009).
34. For example, for the designer (or the User), the function of “illumination” can come from a
window (architecture) or a lamp (furniture), sitting from a chair or a fold in the wall, cooling
from a walk-in freezer or a refrigerator, and so on. Choosing which will be solved by fixed designs
and which by unfixed, by architecture or by furniture (that is, by envelope or by apparatus),
underwrites all programmatic strategies.
35. Perhaps, however, the disciplined section for which OMA and its descendant studios are
known for will in time come to play a different but equally important role. Instead of registering
and exacting an orderly subdivision of urban programs according to a deep sociological
insight into these behaviors placed on an architectural stage, the fixing of program into an overdetermining plan will be more and more at odds with the normal flow of things. Instead of
anticipating and accommodating the City’s organic self-organization, sectional strategies of are
used as a slowing, braking, and grating technique of resistance to those flows. They may be
modern space’s revenge on the programmatic confusion of the virtual envelope.
36. Virilio remarks from the same interview, “In this case too, if time is money, speed is power.
This is why we are constantly in a race. What is a race? It means taking hold of power by getting
there first. And at the same time we are on horseback, on foot or driving a car. It’s very clear that
speed power, and power speed, and instantaneity, ubiquitousness and immediacy are the

Notes

409

prerogatives of the divine.” Quoted from the filmed interview with an interview with Sylvère
Lotringer “Itineraries of the Catastrophe,” Film presented by Lotringer at Mandrake Bar, Los
Angeles, July 1, 2007.
37. See Brian Massumi. “Sensing the Virtual, Building the Insensible,” Architectural Design, Hypersurface Architecture 68, no. 5/6 (May/June 1998): 16–25.
38. Maximum liquidity partitioned by a security barrier that ironically also causes massive
flooding.
39. The exhibition Native Land/Stop-Eject, curated by Paul Virilio and Raymond Depardon at
Cartier Fondation, Paris, 2008-09 promoted the estimation that 645 million people will be displaced by wars and other catastrophes by 2050. Today it’s estimated that there are perhaps 300
million internal illegal immigrants within China. Mostly these are migrants from rural areas who
live in major cities like Beijing and the southern factory metropoles without the appropriate
hukou, or urban license. They often make their way without official social services and schools for
their children, let alone voting rights. Even though they have crossed no national border, they
can be counted with the other hundreds of millions of alegal migrants, stateless persons, and
stateless ethnic groups. Taken together, perhaps they represent a kind of transnational political
prototype of whatever may follow the modern Westphalian model of state and sovereignty. If a
shared relationship to urban infrastructure is a source, if not the source, of that sovereign model
to come, what public do they constitute? What urbanism should they demand? What, if any,
cosmpolitanism do they enable or deflate? Outside the law, are they the left-behind or the
avant-garde?
40. Ricardo Dominguez, Amy Sara Carroll, Brett Stalbaum, Micha Cardenas, and Elle Mehrmand.
Videos of the tool explained and in action are on the B.A.N.G. Lab page at http://vimeo.com/
banglab. See also Electronic Disturbance Theater, and B.a.n.g. Lab. Sustenance, A Play for All Trans
[ ] Borders (New York: Printed Matter, 2010).
41. Agamben, What Is an Apparatus?, 17.
42. It also begs the question as to the City’s right to the User. To what extent does the City have a
corresponding “right” to use the User for its own creative purposes? The tracking of phones for
spatial service optimization is a relatively banal example, but points toward controversies to
come that cannot be solved by the axiomatization of individual privacy.
43. The way that TBIT activates the virtual territorial envelope can also be compared to US federal efforts to augment the physical international border with electronics sensors. In Sustenance,
B.A.N.G. Lab notes that “in March 2010, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security announced
that the virtual portion of the separation barrier erected along the U.S.-Mexico border thus far
had proven ineffective, manifesting numerous technical glitches (notably, a hyper-vigilant
inability to distinguish among wind, sage brush, and human beings).” They ask, “Did an aesthetic unconscious will the fence’s malfunction? Wabbit trans/nation? Mayan meets queer technologies? ‘Earth Telephone’? Sleep Dealer’s nod to node-to-node resistance? It’s your turn to try
to circumvent borders with this ‘true story’—the borders falsely constructed between the university, the gallery, the museum, the library … and the ‘real world.’” The project is described in

410

Notes

greater detail in B.A.N.G. Lab’s “Sustenance: A Play for All Trans [ ] Borders” http://www.thing.
net/~rdom/Sustenance.pdf. They also note that their tool is hardly the first, or most reliable,
navigation technology available: “The outdoor GPS devices from Garmin and Magellan are
indeed useful aids for the long distance overland orienteering required to walk into the United
States. Readily available at Wal-Mart and Best Buy in Mexico, they have been utilized for a long
time in border crossings. In other words, capitalism long ago accomplished what the atavistic
right and neoliberal administrations fear most!”
44. In his capacity as University of California, San Diego visual arts professor, Ricardo Dominguez bore the brunt of the official backlash against TBIT, including a formal accounting inquiry
instigated by the university at the request of at least three Republican congressmen. On August
31, 2010, Glenn Beck launched his site, The Blaze, with the headline, in all capital letters, “UCSD
PROFESSORS: DISSOLVE U.S. — GIVE GPS PHONES WITH EXPLICIT POETRY TO ILLEGALS FOR
BORDER CROSSING.”
45. Michel Foucault and Michel Senellart, The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the College
̀ de France,
1978–79 (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008).
46. We will revisit the potential of the User as geopolitical subject and “the death of user” in the
User chapter.
47. As compared to, for example, Aaron Koblin’s “Flight Patterns,” 2006, http://www
.aaronkoblin.com/work/flightpatterns/index.html. For a more nuanced discussion of the telescopic scales of planetary striation, see Reza Negarastani’s lecture, “The Topos of the Earth: Telescopic and Stereoscopic Visions of the Abyss-in-One,” at the James Gallery, New York, February
21, 2013.
48. Fredric Jameson, The Geopolitical Aesthetic: Cinema and Space in the World System (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1995).
49. See Reyner Banham, Megastructure: Urban Futures of the Recent Past (London: Thames &
Hudson, 1976). The recent lineage includes the New Monumentality, Fuhimiko Maki’s Collective
Form, Kenneth Frampton’s Megaform, Italian neorationalists’ typological piazza, Oswald Mathias
Ungers’s Grossform, and Rem Koolhaas’s Bigness. See Antonio Negri’s essay, “On Rem Koolhaas,”
and Martin Van Schaik and Otakar Má el, Exit Utopia: Architectural Provocations, 1956–76 (Munich:
Prestel, 2005). See also Sabrina Van Der Ley and Markus Richter, Megastructure Reloaded: Visionäre
Stadtentwürfe Der Sechzigerjahre Reflektiert Von Zeitgenössischen Künstlern = Visionary Architecture and
Urban Design of the Sixties Reflected by Contemporary Artists (Ostfildern: Hatje Cantz, 2008).
50. The Bilbao region in Spain experienced significant economic growth concurrent with the
opening of the Frank Gehry designed Guggenheim Bilbao and opening in 1997. The “Bilbao
effect” is a termed coined by Peter Eisenman to refer to the misguided hope of second-tier cites
that adding some flashy new architectural icons would magically boost their city’s brand and
regional economy.
51. Perhaps a future Erich von Daniken will interpret Foster’s structures as proof of alien intelligence on Earth’s moon.

Notes

411

52. Yes, “Ladies and Gentlemen, We Are Floating in Space.”
53. Easterling reaches the same conclusion for different reasons in “New Monuments: Keller
Easterling on Norman Foster’s Crystal Island, ”Artforum International 46, no. 10 (Summer 2008).
54. There is no lack of attention in the popular press as to how Cloud platforms affect Bay Area
urbanism. See, for example, Kelsey Campbell-Dollaghan, “How the Tech Industry Is Quietly
Changing the Face of American Cities,” Gizmodo, June 18, 2013, and Daniel Safarik, “The Spell of
Hot Desk,” Unfrozen (blog), May 28, 2013, http://arch-unfrozen.tumblr.com/post/51615608029/
the-spell-of-hot-desk.
55. A grand organizational chart, like Dürer’s massive print, Triumphal Arch of Maximilian I.
56. See the Google 2.0 campus video at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v z3v4rIG8kQA.
57. See for example, no author cited, “Googledome, or Temple of Doom?” http://www
.economist.com/news/business/21645747-tech-firms-are-building-pharaonic-head-offices-again
-googledome-or-temple-doom, March 7, 2015, and Nick Allen, “Google Faces Opposition to New
Headquarters,” Telegraph, February 25, 2015. See http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/
google/11435802/Google-faces-opposition-to-new-headquarters.html.
58. As this book was going to press, we learned that the Mountain View city council voted for
Linkedin’s alternative proposal for the site, perhaps preventing at least delaying, the eventual
construction of some version of Ingalls’ and Heatherwick’s plan. See Conor Dougherty “Google
Loses to Linkedin in Silicon Valley Headquarters Pitch,” New York Times, May 6, 2015, http://
nyti.ms/1F68CMI.
59. Adam Greenfield compares “Zee Town” to company towns of years past in “Is Facebook’s
‘Zee Town’ More Than Just a Mark Zuckerberg Vanity Project?” Guardian, March 10, 2015,
http://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/10/facebook-zee-town-mark-zuckerberg.
60. See Kirk Johnson and Nick Wingfield, “As Amazon Stretches, Seattle’s Downtown Is
Reshaped,” New York Times, August 25, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/26/us/
as-amazon-stretches-seattles-downtown-is-reshaped.html.
61. See for example, Colin Marshall, “Amazon’s New Downtown Seattle HQ: Victory for the
City over Suburbia?” Guardian, May 22, 2014. http://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/may/22/
amazon-futuristic-new-downtown-seattle-hq-microsoft-nintendo.
62. For a partial list of the locations of Amazon fulfillment centers in North America, see Jennifer
Dunn, “Locations of Amazon Fulfillment Centers,” Bottom Line (blog), March 17, 2014, http://
outright.com/blog/locations-of-amazon-fulfillment-centers-2/.
63. In the essay “Utopia as Replication,” in Valences of the Dialectic (London: Verso, 2009), Fredric
Jameson draws links between Walmart and certain infrastructural utopian potentiality.
64. On Amazon’s ongoing implementation of robotic systems in its warehouse and distribution
chain, see Sam Grobart, “Amazon’s Robotic Future: A Work in Progress,” Bloomberg Business Week,
November 30, 2012, 2012 http://www.bloomberg.com/bw/articles/2012-11-30/amazons-robotic
-future-a-work-in-progress and Sarah O’Connor, “Amazon’s Human Robots: They Trek 15 Miles a

412

Notes

Day around a Warehouse, Their Every Move Dictated by Computers Checking Their Work. Is
This the Future of the British Workplace?” Mail Online, March 1, 2013, http://www.dailymail.
co.uk/news/article-2286227/Amazons-human-robots-Is-future-British-workplace.html. Amazon
also purchased Kiva Systems, a leading manufacturer of warehouse automation systems. See Scott
Kirsner, “Amazon Buys Warehouse Robotics Start-Up Kiva Systems for $775 Million,” Boston.com,
March 19, 2012, http://www.boston.com/business/technology/innoeco/2012/03/amazon_buys
_warehouse_robotics.html.
65. Stowe Boyd, “If Amazon Is the Future of Work, Then Be Afraid,” Gigaom Research, February
22, 2013, http://research.gigaom.com/2013/02/if-amazon-is-the-future-of-work/.
66. This dynamic is the central problem drawn out in Jaron Lanier in Who Owns the Future? (New
York: Simon & Schuster, 2013), and it leads him to advocate for, among other things, a revaluation of how tacit human knowledge might be rewarded by ubiquitous micropayments. See also
Jaron Lanier and Douglas Rushkoff, “The Local-Global Flip, or, ‘The Lanier Effect,’” Edge, August
29, 2011, http://edge.org/conversation/the-local-global-flip.
67. See Jobs’s presentation of the proposed Campus 2 to the Cupertino City Council at Cupertino City Channel, “Steve Jobs Presents to the Cupertino City Council (6/7/11),” YouTube, June 7,
2011, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v gtuz5OmOh_M.
68. Alexandra Lange, “New Apple HQ, 1957,” Design Observer, June 11, 2011, http://
designobserver.com/feature/new-apple-hq-1957/28018.
69. Michel Houellebecq, The Possibility of an Island, trans. Gavin Bowd (New York: Vintage International, 2007). More than one person has also remarked to me that their first reaction to seeing
Jobs/Foster’s proposal was to recall the “silver seed flying to a new home in the Sun” from the
Neil Young song, “After the Gold Rush.”
70. An impression that is not discouraged by the company’s international tax avoidance strategies. See Nelson D. Schwartz, “Apple’s Web of Tax Shelters Saved It Billions, Panel Finds,” New
York Times, May 20, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/21/business/apple-avoided-billions
-in-taxes-congressional-panel-says.html.
71. On the “disappearance of the outside” that comprehensive views of the whole planet suggest
or enforce, see Diedrich Diederichsen and Anselm Franke, eds., Whole Earth: California and the
Disappearance of the Outside (Berlin: Sternberg Press, 2013).
72. Geoff Manaugh, “The Planetary Super-Surface of San Bernardino County,” BLDGBLOG, April
15, 2013, http://bldgblog.blogspot.com/2013/04/the-planetary-super-surface-of-san.html.
73. For a glimpse into the everyday life of workers at Apple City in Zhengzhou, see this photo
essay, Gilles Sabrie, “Off-Hour Escapes for China’s Workers,” New York Times, July 15, 2013,
http://www.nytimes.com/slideshow/2013/07/16/world/asia/20130717-CHINA.html. The accompanying text states, “Unlike Apple’s modernistic new campus in California, which will be surrounded by apricot trees, the Zhengzhou facility has all the charm of a penal colony. Employees,
who must wear matching uniforms, say supervisors routinely curse and yell.”

Notes

413

74. Herbert G. Wells, The Time Machine (Stuttgart: Reclam, 1984).
75. Perhaps the most significant Cloud megastructure is not one built to house the higher brain
functions of a private global platform, but one built to house the intelligence and surveillance
operations of a global platform in the form of a state, namely, the United States, and specifically
the National Security Agency’s Utah Data Center. See “Utah Data Center,” Wikipedia, November
7, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Utah_Data_Center, and the helpful “NSA Utah Data Center:
Serving Our Nation’s Intelligence Community,” NSA Utah Data Center, https://nsa.gov1.info/
utah-data-center/. If there’s one building the in the world where The Stack lives, it might be here.
I think not, actually.

Address Layer
1. Henri Bergson, Matter and Memory, trans. Nancy Margaret Paul and William Scott Palmer
(London: G. Allen &, 1912), 276.
2. Franz Kafka, “An Imperial Message,” in The Penal Colony: Stories and Short Pieces, trans. Edwin
Muir and Willa Muir (New York: Schocken Books, 1961), 1–2.
3. In some objects, you can see the entire Stack at once.
4. See “CeNSE,” Wikipedia, March 21, 2013, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CeNSE. If Cisco had
Planetary Skin and HP has Central Nervous System of the Earth, then we eagerly anticipate claims
of the Planetary Immune System and the Earth Lymph Node Network.
5. Beginning in 1913, the International Map Project (also known as the Millionth Map, because
of its use of 1:1,000,000 scale standards, and by the number of total maps necessary to complete
the set) sought to subdivide the Earth’s surface according to a standard alphanumeric gridded
matrix of longitudes and latitudes. The Central Bureau of the Map of the World was established,
and a few thousand maps were produced using the standard system. Germany withdrew in 1914
as the European powers were more preoccupied with reinscribing borders than capturing their
status. Later it was assumed by the United Nations in 1953, after which it lost momentum.
6. Cory Doctorow, “Lockdown: The Coming War on General-purpose Computing,” Boing Boing,
January 10, 2012, http://boingboing.net/2012/01/10/lockdown.html.
7. This is not lost on the handful of Internet of Things consortia that are positioning for a position of “generative entrenchment” with regards to ubiquitous computing protocols, languages,
and standards. Among these are the All Seen Alliance (Qualcomm, Microsoft, LG, Cisco, among
others), the Industrial Internet Consortium (GE, Intel, IBM, AT&T, among many others) and the
Open Interconnect Consortium (Intel, Samsung, Broadcom, Dell, and others). Just as for the circuit versus packet-switching battles during the early years of what became the Internet, for the
emergent Internet of Things, which standards can achieve dominant platform status and which
are forgotten will help determine the winners and losers among all the alliance member companies. Bruce Sterling argues that the interests end-users and consumers will likely not be wellserved by how such standards are adopted. See his book The Epic Struggle of the Internet of Things

414

Notes

(Moscow: Strelka Press, 2014). One lesson of TCP/IP’s adoption over OSI is that whatever platform can make use of existing systems fastest and easiest has an advantage over those that
demand all new implementation. What turn out to be the real “killer apps” of Internet of Things
(indeterminate at best at the time of writing) will in turn drive what (and who) is linked with
when, where and when, and so it may be that end-user adoption will be a function of needs after
all. However, whether those “end users” are advertising companies, search engines, or actual persons is an equally undecided question.
8. It also inspires a new wave of currency speculators interested in refashioning “money” as a
system of valuation, exchange, and references.
9. This is taken up in a different way by Hiroki Azuma in his “Postal-Ontological” in Ontological,
Postal Basis: For Jacques Derrida (Tokyo: Shinch sha, 1998).
10. That axis of resistance was core, for example, to the situationists’ reimagination of the
modern city through unitary urbanism, and the impetus for Guy Debord to scramble (or
unscramble) le Plan de Paris into the psychogeographic Naked City, though for Debord, as for
others, the impetus is not necessarily to retake the territory but unmake the possibility of a universal addressability in the first place. See Guy Debord, “Guide psychogéographique de Paris,” in
Discours sur les passions de l’amour (Copenhagen: Permild & Rosengreen, 1955).
11. See Michael Witmore, “Text: A Massively Addressable Object,” Wine Dark Sea (blog), December 31, 2010, http://winedarksea.org/?p 926, and “Digital Inquiry,” Digital Humanities @ the
UW-Madison, http://dighum.wisc.edu/digitalinquiry/.
12. Witmore wrote, “The book or physical instance, then, is one of many levels of address. Backing
out into a larger population, we might take a genre of works to be the relevant level of address. Or
we could talk about individual lines of print; all the nouns in every line; every third character in
every third line. All of this variation implies massive flexibility in levels of address. And more
provocatively: when we create a digitized population of texts, our modes of address become more
and more abstract: all concrete nouns in all the items in the collection, for example, or every item
identified as a ‘History’ by Heminges and Condell in the First Folio. Every level is a provisional
unity: stable for the purposes of address, but also: stable because it is the object of address. Books
are such provisional unities. So are all the proper names in the phone book. … To have this
thought is to dispose relevant elements in the dataset in much the same way a spreadsheet aggregates a text in ways that allow for layered access. A reader is a maker [emphasis mine] of such a
momentary dispositif, and reading might be described as the continual redisposition of levels of
address in this manner. We need a phenomenology of these acts, one that would allow us to link
quantitative work on a culture’s ‘built environment’ of words to the kinesthetic and imaginative
dimensions of life at a given moment.” Witmore, “Text: A Massively Addressable Object.”
13. Jacques Derrida, The Post Card: From Socrates to Freud and Beyond (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987).
14. See Keller Easterling, “An Internet of Things,” e-flux, no. 31 (January 2012), http://worker01
.e-flux.com/pdf/article_8946204.pdf, and Molly Wright Steenson, “Architectures of Information:
Christopher Alexander, Cedric Price, and Nicholas Negroponte & MIT’s Architecture Machine

Notes

415

Group” (PhD dissertation, Princeton University School of Architecture, 2014). Richard Saul
Wurman is widely credited with the first use of the term information architecture, and for this we
may be glad. He was also the founder of TED, and for this we may be sad.
15. Vernor Vinge, “Vernor Vinge at the Center for Design and Geopolitics” (lecture at the Center
for Design and Geopolitics University of California, San Diego, June 3, 2011).
16. The thing as “gathering” is in reference to Martin Heidegger’s use in his 1950 essay “Das
Ding,” and Bruno Latour’s employment and furtherance of this image in his “parliament of
things.” For an explanation of Latour’s construction (and an idiosyncratic rejoinder), see Bruno
Latour, Graham Harman, and Peter Erdelyi, The Prince and the Wolf: Latour and Harman at the LSE
(Winchester, UK: ZERO Books, 2011).
17. For such strangeness, see Mark Wilson, “The DRM Chair Self-Destructs after 8 Sittings,” Fast
Company, March 7, 2013, http://www.fastcodesign.com/1672050/the-drm-chair-self-destructs
-after-8-sittings.
18. Consider the following regarding potential interfaces between viral systems of various
scales. John Baichtal, “3D Printed Model of a Virus Self Assembles When Shaken,” MAKE,
August 16, 2011, http://makezine.com/2011/08/16/3d-printed-model-of-a-virus-self-assembles
-when-shaken/.
19. Not just in Charles Stross’s Rule 34, malware for 3D printers is live and at play. Kerry Stevenson, “The 3D Printer Virus, Really?” Fabbaloo, April 7, 2010, http://www.fabbaloo.com/
blog/2010/4/7/the-3d-printer-virus-really.html.
20. Cory Doctorow, “Metacrap: Putting the Torch to Seven Straw-men of the Meta-Utopia,” Well,
August 26, 2011.
21. Payam Barnaghi, Cory Henson, Kerry Taylor, and Wei Wang, “Semantics for the Internet of
Things: Early Progress and Back to the Future,” International Journal on Semantic Web and Information System 8, no. 1 (2012): 1–21, http://knoesis.org/library/download/IJSWIS_SemIoT.pdf.
22. Yann Moulier-Boutang, Cognitive Capitalism (London: Polity Press, 2012).
23. Open Internet of Things Assembly, “Bill of Rights” http://postscapes.com/open-internet-of
-things-assembly. (July 17, 2012).
24. See, for example, Saul A. Kripke, Naming and Necessity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1980). I particularly care, in this instance, to underscore that citing this work is not the
same as recommending this work.
25. For an overview, see “Universally Unique Identifier,” Wikipedia, November 1, 2014,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier. However, in a practical context, the
separation between designation and the designated is not so clean. For example, with some GUID
(globally unique identifier) schemes used to identify unique information in distributed systems,
instances (such as file system IDs) are sometimes generated by an algorithm that incorporates the
network interface ID of the User’s computer as well the exact moment at which the ID was generated, measured in 100-nanosecond increments since the adoption of the Gregorian calendar.

416

Notes

26. The core parable is from Heidegger’s “The Thing” essay from 1950.
27. By contrast, with the connotation of both for Graham Harman, for example: Graham
Harman, Toward Speculative Realism: Essays and Lectures (London: Zero Books, 2010). Whereas the
veracity and value of Object-Oriented Ontology would be as true or false 1000 years ago as it is
now, or as true or false or 1000 years in the future, the “flat” addressable terrain I discuss could
only exist and function when a particular set of historically contingent technological substrates
could make it so. It is mechanically flat, not ontologically flat.
28. This concept of global network topology is all but axiomatic after the work of Manuel Castells and Saskia Sassen, and after a thousand and one telecommunications and airline commercials showing arcing lines pinpointing senders and receivers over a rotating globe.
29. For readers with a Continental bent, the reference here may be to Jakob von Uexküll, A Foray
into the Worlds of Animals and Humans with a Theory of Meaning, trans. Joseph D. O’Neil (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010; originally published 1934) while others may consider
information theory in the context of quantitative biology. See, for example, John Avery’s introduction: Information Theory and Evolution (River Edge, NJ: World Scientific, 2003).
30. See the DOI (Digital Object Identifier) Foundation site at http://www.doi.org/. See IBM and
Eurotech, “MQTT V3.1 Protocol Specification,” IBM, http://public.dhe.ibm.com/software/dw/
webservices/ws-mqtt/mqtt-v3r1.html.
31. Ben Edelman and Michael Schwarz of have modeled an auction market for scarce IPv4
addresses: “Pricing and Efficiency in the Market for IP Addresses,” Working Knowledge, November
3, 2011, http://hbswk.hbs.edu/item/6849.html.
32. For an interesting perspective on this, especially as it relates to Internet mapping, see Kimberly Claffy, Ten Things Lawyers Should Know about the Internet (San Diego, CA: Cooperative Association for Internet Data Analysis, 2008), http://www.caida.org/publications/papers/2008/
lawyers_top_ten/lawyers_top_ten.pdf.
33. For an overview of IPv6 and the server-edge problem/opportunity, especially as related to
early Internet models, see Jim Stogdill, “IPv6 Day and the State of the Edge,” O’Reilly Radar, June
6, 2012, http://radar.oreilly.com/2012/06/ipv6-internet-addresses-scarcity.html.
34. See Jorge Luis Borges, “Library of Babel,” in Labyrinths: Selected Stories and Other Writings, ed.
Donald Alfred Yates and James E. Irby (London: Penguin, 1970; originally published 1941), 58–
64. From the Wikipedia entry for “The Library of Babel”: “The Library contains at least 251,312,000
books. (The average large library on Earth at the present time typically contains only several million volumes, i.e. on the order of about 106 books. The world’s largest library, the Library of
Congress, has 2.18 x 107 books.) Just one ‘authentic’ volume, together with all those variants
containing only a handful of misprints, would occupy so much space that they would fill the
known universe.”
35. The theoretical space of IPv6 can be measured in a number of ways, many of which boggle
the mind and none of which guarantee anything whatsoever about future implementation: 6.67
1023 IPv6 addresses per square meter of the surface of Earth, or 6.67 1017 per square millimeter,

Notes

417

or 6.67 1011 per square micrometer. The image shown of an IPv6 address the size of a red blood
cell seems tiny, but in principle, it is big enough to contain 1 trillion addresses according to that
distribution. Imagine if every Google search received an individual IPv6 address. If we were to
assign an individual address to 1,000 searches per day for all 7 billion people (or 2.56 1015
addressed searches per year), it would take 1023 years to run out of addresses. The age of the entire
universe since the Big Bang is only about 109 years. And so on. Thanks to Sean Crowe for helping
to sketch out these figures.
36. An IPv6 address is not a random number but a hierarchical addressing structure, like a postal
address. It is a categorization and mapping schema, in which some numbers are subsets of others,
used for routing, and so on. Like any other widely adopted addressing platform, it is a kind of
geographical and jurisdiction technology. For what that political technology is ultimately used
for, if anything of significance, we do not know.
37. Secure hashes may be another worthwhile model to pursue. Julian Assange outlines lays out a
vision for this in his When WikiLeaks Met Google (N.p.: OR Books, 2014).
38. Once again there is a correspondence between the universal addressability of discrete assemblages with mass and indiscrete assemblages without mass, things, or concepts, with the flat
ontology of Latour’s “irreductionism.” One could borrow any Latour litany of possible objects
and imagine them as addressed in relation to one another and supported by an artificial infrastructure for the exchange of physical information between each other. That said, it may be
tempting to overinterpret apparent resemblances between the generic universalities of deep
address with the various flat ontologies of object-oriented philosophy, and any direct conflation
of the two would be a mistake. The Address layer is an artificial superimposition of a symbolic
cartography onto the world according to a specific, contingent diagram, and like any other symbolic cartography, it is totally limited by the prejudicial finitude of its own structure. Its ontology
is tactical, not metaphysical. That its structure, as a layer within The Stack, would come to materially affect whatever “objects” it may address demonstrates only the power of categorization to
mobilize complex systems. The litany of things that may be identified by Address sets does not
actually flatten the plateau any further than it already is, or support any additional withdrawal of
objects from one another. To the contrary, it nominates each as an instance with a location to
which and from which information could be communicated. It is only cartography and communication, not chemistry or ontology.
39. I will quote a standard definition of the term. Haecceity (from the Latin haecceitas, which
translates as “thisness”) is a term from medieval philosophy coined by Duns Scotus. It denotes
the discrete qualities, properties, or characteristics of a thing that make it a particular thing. Haecceity is a person or object’s “thisness.” Charles Sanders Peirce later used the term as a nondescriptive reference to an individual. See Martin A. Bertman, Classical American Pragmatism (New York:
Humanities-Ebooks, 2010).
40. Furthermore, the specter of deep address should not be seen as a necessary justification for a
cosmically inflated ontological “computationalism” whereby the whole universe is understood at
its essence as algorithmic unfolding, with deep address cast as infinite drawing by which such
cosmic calculations can be mapped. Instead, deep address should be taken for what it is: an

418

Notes

emergent global logic for the de-differentiation of things and events by their common entry into
a common, artificial platform of identification and exchange. And for this already and without
decoration, it already represents a sufficiently disruptive and provocative aspect of The Stack
infrastructure and its relation to the omnivorousness of Anthropocene capitalism (as well as to
the fragility of the totalities that its growth program composes for itself and which may prove its
undoing). See Alexander R. Galloway, “The Poverty of Philosophy: Realism and Post-Fordism,”
Critical Inquiry 39, no. 2 (2013): 347–366, doi:10.1086/668529, and Reza Negarastani, “The NonTrivial Goat and the Cliffs of the Universal” (lecture at the Abrons Playhouse, New York, November 15, 2012), and my own “Some Trace Effects of the Post-Anthropocene: On Accelerationist
Geopolitical Aesthetics,” 2013, http://www.e-flux.com/issues/46-june-2013/.
41. I refer to Latour’s well-known “parliament of things”: We Have Never Been Modern (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,1993). While despecializing modernist divisions of scientific
and interpretive labor is laudable, a “parliament” is an inadequate politico-architectural metaphor for the designability and composability of the tumult he describes.
42. Gean Moreno, “Notes on the Inorganic, Part I: Accelerations,” E-Flux, no. 31 (January 2012),
http://worker01.e-flux.com/pdf/article_8946775.pdf.
43. Galloway comments on the tactics of black bloc juxtaposed with the black box, the opaque
machine that affects the world within open explication. The goal of black bloc is not to redraw
the map or to take a different position within an alternative territory, but to refuse formal appearance altogether, to exist and operate under a cloak of aterritorial nonaddressability. See his “Black
Box, Black Bloc,” in Communization and Its Discontents: Contestation, Critique, and Contemporary
Struggles, ed. Benjamin Noys (New York: Autonomedia, 2012), 237–249. With far blunter wit,
Brian Holmes articulates resistance to the prevailing “technosemiotic order,” its molar enclosures,
and their “cybernetic lines of latitude and longitude … speak[ing)] of exploration and conquest,
of industry and trade.” These can be eluded through the cultivation of alternative schizoanalytic
cartographies, and toward this, he warns us solemnly that we must “Escape the Overcode” See
https://brianholmes.wordpress.com/2009/01/19/book-materials/.
44. On the Aozaki project, see Nobutaka Aozaki, “Value_Added #240950,” 2012, http://
www.nobutakaaozaki.com/value_added.html, and his “Artist Project/Value Added: # 240950 DM
NOSLT WHL KRNL CR,” Cabinet, no. 47 (Fall 2012).
45. Aozaki’s project is also a nice demonstration (and inversion) of the “double spend problem”
that could plague any digital or networked currency: without discrete physical tokens that guarantee each unit of value is in only one place at a time, how to ensure that the same “dollar” is not
spent more than once at a time? Blockchains offer the solution of distributed clearing of all transactions so that bitcoin’s realm of value-representation remains uncompromised. It does not,
however, solve the “problem” that Aozaki introduces, which we could perhaps call the “double
acquire problem.”
46. Rachel Swaby, “Big Ideas: Spray Wi-Fi Hotspots on to Everything,” Wired UK, March
30, 2013, http://www.wired.co.uk/magazine/archive/2013/03/big-ideas/spray-wi-fi-hotspots-on
-to-everything.

Notes

419

47. Thanks to Aaron Fooshee, a student in a workshop I taught at Art Center College of Design in
Pasadena, California, in 2013 for exploring the idea of object-to-object spam.
48. See my “Root the Earth: Peak Oil Apophenia,” in Leper Creativity: Cyclonopedia Symposium, ed.
Ed Keller, Nicola Masciandaro, Nicola Masciandaro, and Eugene Thacker (Brooklyn, NY: Punctum
Books, 2012).

Interface Layer
1. Deleuze, Gilles. “The Brain Is the Screen: Interview with Gilles Deleuze on ‘The Time-Image’,”
Discourse 20, no. 3, Gilles Deleuze: A Reason to Believe in This World (October 1, 1998): 47–55.
See also Gregory Flaxman, The Brain Is the Screen: Deleuze and the Philosophy of Cinema (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2000).
2. A widely quoted quip from McLuhan, with numerous sources in print, many quoting television appearances.
3. We should be careful, as William James once said, that the word dog does not bite.
4. It’s always possible that a technical relay between button and effect is in good working order
but that the appropriate semantic association is scrambled, such as when the button that says
Open in fact closes a door, or the knob for watering flowers opens the garage door instead.
Jacques Tati’s films elevated the lampooning of these interfacial crossed wires into his own conservative lament against modernity.
5. Conversely, phatic interfaces—those that interstitially interrupt attention, such as a phone
ring—as well as geolocative tracking of devices revealing User trajectory, like a tagged shark, are
examples of interfaces that the User accesses The Stack, but interfaces through which The Stack
accesses the User.
6. The etymology of interface dates the word back only to the late nineteenth century, and is now
defined by the Oxford English Dictionary as “a surface lying between two portions of matter or
space, and forming their common boundary.” “interface, n.,” OED Online, July 2014, Oxford
University Press, http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/97747?rskey BpuToj&result 1&isAdvanced
false (accessed July 12, 2014). Only much later does it come to mean components in a machine,
then specific components in a computing machine, and finally the tools used to engage with a
computer. In fact, each of these connotations is still active in our use in regard to the Interface
layer of The Stack. It is interesting nevertheless that it took the emergence of computation for the
interfaciality of the world to warrant a separate disciplinary mode of design. Now the program of
interface design is to expand (some would say inflate) its portfolio toward the diagnosis and
designation and all manner of complex systems in the physical world, including common
boundaries in the physical world. See my “What Do We Mean by ‘Program’?” Interactions: Experiences, People, Technology 15, no. 3 (2008), 20–26. See also http://www.bratton.info/projects/texts/
what-do-we-mean-by-program/.
7. This definition is drawn from my introductory remarks at Ambient: Interface, the 54th Annual
International Aspen Design Conference, which I cochaired with Christian Moeller in 2005.

420

Notes

8. For a much detailed elaboration of these different performative typologies of interfaces, see my
“All Design Is Interface Design” (presented at SoftWhere, University of California, San Diego,
June, 25, 2008). See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v MSoGFzLlLYQ.
9. Michel Serres and Peter Hallward, “The Science of Relations: An Interview,” Angelaki: Journal of
the Theoretical Humanities 8 (2003): 227–238, doi:10.1080/0969725032000162675.
10. “Nicolelis Lab,” http://www.nicolelislab.net/.
11. Brian Massumi, “Sensing the Virtual,” Hypersurface Architecture, ed. Stephen Perrella, Architectural Design (Profile no. 133), 68 (May-June 1998): 16–24.
12. In this conjunction of a generalized interfaciality with the technogenesis of the human form,
the reference is, in very different ways, related to the work Gilbert Simonden and Bernard Stiegler,
but recall also Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s discussion of the cane becoming part of the body of the
person who uses it to sense the world.
13. Lev Manovich, “Cultural Software, Introduction to Software Takes Command,” July
2011, http://manovich.net/content/04-projects/068-cultural-software/67-article-2011.pdf. Bruno
Latour, Pablo Jensen, Tommaso Venturini, Sébastian Grauwin, and Dominique Boullier, “‘The
Whole Is Always Smaller Than Its Parts’: A Digital Test of Gabriel Tardes’ Monads,” British Journal
of Sociology 63 (2012): 590–615, doi:10.1111/j.1468-4446.2012.01428.x.
14. Peter Galison, “The Lives of Images: Peter Galison in Conversation with Trevor Paglen,” Aperture 21 (Summer 2013).
15. Like most visual economies of love or war, this depends on the identification of “objects
of interest.” See “Cyborg Astrobiologist Put Through Its Paces in West Virginian Coalfields,”
MIT Technology Review, September 24, 2013, http://www.technologyreview.com/view/519576/
cyborg-astrobiologist-put-through-its-paces-in-west-virginian-coalfields/.
16. John Underkoffler’s work on large-scale gestural interface systems has helped define this
avenue of design research.
17. “So the word habit, from habere, signifies corporeal possession, the having or wearing proper
to body, which is conspicuously demonstrated by the hand as an instrument of possession operating in concert with the overcoming of inside/outside distinctions proper to consciousness.”
Nicola Masciandaro, Come Cosa Che Cada: Habit and Cataclysm, or Exploding Plasticity (New York:
TPSNY/Erudio Editions, 2010).
18. What groups these together is the use of the motor body itself as a signifying machine, not a
source from which a signifying trace remediates between body and machine. The model is kind
of an inversion of modern dance notation systems, which code the slightest gesture with incredible nuance and flexibility.
19. I should explain this folding/unfolding allegory in more detail. The “Thing” is, at least in the
German, a “gathering.” Invoking this etymology, Bruno Latour extends Heidegger’s four-foldedness of the thing into new domains. We could say, however, that the interfaciality of a thing
inverts the gathering and its network of relations. According to the Latour-Heidegger story,

Notes

421

drawn from Heidegger’s 1950 essay, “Das Ding,” and Latour’s recent essays on the “parliament of
things,” a thing is an assemblage or index of those actors and forces that gave rise to it, which are
combined and folded within one another in marvelous ways to result in a given thing. The
“thing,” however stable or temporary, gathers its particular forms and forces of earthly production into itself and presents them (each one of these—sun, water, metal, work—is still present in
the thing) toward a new use or encounter. Conversely, the interfaciality of a thing inverts the
direction of that gathering. In connecting one thing to another by remote control, by action at a
distance, the interfacial thing unfolds out toward the world of other things in looping cybernetic
circuits of relay and interruption. It doesn’t fold in; it explodes out. The unfolding, degathering
interfaciality of the thing is equal and opposite to its infolding gathering as assemblage. See
Martin Heidegger, “The Thing,” in William Lovitt, trans. and ed., The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays (New York: Garland Publishing, 1977), and Bruno Latour, We Have Never
Been Modern (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991).
20. And before this, the network city was already well understood. The Romans, and the informational city by French pneumatic tube engineers who largely perfected the point-to-point
packet, switched distribution analog information units. By the 1960s, continental-scale computational network systems, such as the SAGE early warning system, suggested more comprehensive
transformations of urban pathways and partitions according to information processing perspectives, especially in cinema and architecture. A short and scattered list might include Jean-Luc
Godard’s Alpha 60 (1965), overseeing a future Paris in Alphaville; Dennis Crompton’s Computer
City (1964); and John McHale’s 2000 (1967). All are part of a milieu popularized by Marshall
McLuhan’s publication of Understanding Media in 1964, which made the redefinition of the city
into a landscape of smart networks, informational prosthesis, a cocktail party commonplace.
That figure of the city, less a vast industrial machine than an unfolding collective sensory
apparatus, couched many of the important cinematic projects of the time, from Stan Van Der
Beek intermedia experiments to Gene Youngblood’s expanded cinema; they explored the architectural potential of cinema as an architectural material and the urban environment as a cinematic surface. See also the early music video for Pierre Henry, “Psyche Rock,” 1967, http://
www.dailymotion.com/video/xcjrav_pierre-henry-psyche-rock_music.
21. The ambition of the BioBricks Foundation is to introduce general-purpose modular blocks of
DNA for do-it-yourself biotechnologists. See “About BioBricks Foundation,” http://biobricks.org/
about-foundation/.
22. The resolution of real events in the physical world will be determined as much by operations
made through software as not, and from within the substance of that real world, perhaps processed by nanometric smart motes and their yet-to-be-invented atom-scale effectors, to remote
sensing and management through various sensors and interfaces. If so, then the implicit or
explicit association of the digital with the virtual and the virtual with the immaterial or unphysical (and, conversely, the analog with the actual, material, and physical) is well beyond the point
of impasse. More pressing is the physicality of computing and the materiality of the virtual and
the actuality of digital/analog as state conditions of the same matter. This holds for architectural
and urban-scale matter as much as any other, and so the question of architecture at the edge of
physicality is less interesting if it underwrites interest and evaporation of interest in physical

422

Notes

systems through a relentless investment in computation as a numinous and gnostic portal to
pure algorithmic autonomy, or some opposite thereof. Better to serve the physicalization of
urban material as the computational figuration of what we used to call virtual toward the physical,
toward data in-the-wild and as-the-wild.
23. This connotation of “hyperobject”—as in hyperlink, a human-computer interaction mechanism in the guise of a physical object—is very different from that already defined by Timothy
Morton in Hyperobjects: Philosophy and Ecology after the End of the World (Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 2013).
24. For this foregrounding of the agency of interfaces, the project that might define the political
design ends of the spectrum may be Aldo Van Eyck’s urban playgrounds for children. Thanks to
McKenzie Wark for this comparison.
25. “What if the architectonic in Kant were not an overarching system but something that has
itself to be constructed anew, in each case, in relation to fresh problems—something looser, more
flexible, less complete, more irregular, a free plan in which things hang together without yet
being held in place?” John Rajchman, Constructions (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998).
26. As already noted, Koolhaas captured this exact dynamic in his Delirious New York study. See
Rem Koolhaas, Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for Manhattan (New York: Monacelli
Press, 1994).
27. Franco B. Berardi, Neuro Totalitarianism (Los Angeles: Semiotext(e), 2014).
28. Logistics here refers to both the expert mobilization of things, but also the aestheticized image
of mobility in action. For the latter, logistics is a technical imaginary for the world in choreographic motion, an image that in turn becomes a technique for organizing the world as a distributed, generalized complex of distributed, integrated interfaces.
29. A possible methodological framework: Interface design is less about the design of a thing
than of a condition of transference (that could become a thing) and can take at least three main
forms. First-order interface design produces the conditions of interassemblage between people,
things, or places—making it good, smart, fast, flexible, sustainable, and so on. This is how urban
planning and public policy are also interface design. Second-order interface design produces
images of interassemblage that give order, predictability, and clarity to how people use systems.
These images are very powerful guides—so powerful that they really are the interfaces to what
they represent. This is how graphic designers are interface designers. Third-order interface design
produces the image-instruments of interassemblage that allow for the system to be governed,
controlled, and optimized according to plan. These are maps of a system that, because they are
interactive maps, become tools to engage that system.
30. For a more in-depth discussion of assemblage not as a rigid system but as a temporally fragile
coming together and falling apart at once, see Manuel De Landa, A New Philosophy of Society:
Assemblage Theory and Social Complexity (London: Continuum, 2009).
31. On the aesthetic engine of cosmograms, see Melik Ohanian and Jean-Christophe Royoux,
Cosmograms (New York: Lukas & Sternberg, 2005). The visual language of the logistical sublime

Notes

423

has a specific graphical and photographical style. It is a dramatic mix of the now overly familiar
landscapes of Andreas Gursky, Edward Burtynsky, Bruce Mau, and Jennifer Leonard, Massive
Change (London: Phaidon Press, 2005).
32. Keller Easterling’s work is paramount in tracking how the logistical aesthetic works itself out
through corporate and academic architecture. See Easterling, Extrastatecraft: The Power of Infrastructure Space (London: Verso, 2014).
33. “Switches” in this case would include the aggregate number of transistors on all the networked and embedded processors (a kind of cumulative and total Moore’s Law of interfacial
capacity) but also non-computational interfacial gateways that contribute to the overall flux and
flow, and ranging from object-scale to urban-scale to transcontinental-scale.
34. Articulating this insight in every way possible seemed to define fin-de-millennium social
theory in relation to the network society, the global city, the information bomb, sociology
against society, supermodernism, and so on. See Manuel Castells and Gustavo Cardoso, The Network Society: From Knowledge to Policy (Washington, DC: Center for Transatlantic Relations, Johns
Hopkins University, 2006); Saskia Sassen, “The Global City: Introducing a Concept,” Brown Journal of World Affairs 11, no. 2 (2005): 27–43, http://www.saskiasassen.com/pdfs/publications/theglobal-city-brown.pdf; Paul Virilio, The Information Bomb (London: Verso, 1999); John Urry,
Sociology beyond Societies: Mobilities for the Twenty-First Century (London: Routledge, 2000); and
Hans Ibelings, Supermodernism: Architecture in the Age of Globalization (Rotterdam: NAi, 1998).
35. “Binding collective representation” is meant in the sense central to the grand unifying social
theories of both Emile Durkheim and Niklas Luhmman.
36. On “punctualization,” see Bruno Latour, Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005).
37. A result examined with nuance by Alexander R. Galloway in his essay “The Unworkable
Interface,” in his book The Interface Effect (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2012), 25–53.
38. For example, the recent editorial work by Manuel Lima and visualization work by Laura
Kurgan.
39. There is resonance with Fredric Jameson’s discussion of images of totality as an active
response to systemic complexity in ways that would contradict the notions that information
visualization brings an eclipse of active and prejudiced interpretation (Manovich) and undermines any need for macroscopic and global theories of the social (Latour).
40. The term utopian imaginary is used more or less in Jameson’s sense of a progressive (if frustrated and sublimated) desire for the comprehension and reform of social totality, especially as
seen through speculative science and technological fictions, across all media. Fredric Jameson,
Archaeologies of the Future: The Desire Called Utopia and Other Science Fictions (New York: Verso,
2005).
41. The design problems related to nonvisual (or least nongraphical) interfaces, such as those
conceived for our many ubiquitous computing environments, are less clearly outlined before us

424

Notes

now, especially when these interfaces are employed for the benefit of nonhuman Users. When
software is embedded within a User’s physical environment, it becomes part of his habitat and
contributes to how he is embodied by and within that habitat. In sociological theory, the term
habitus has been used, by Pierre Bourdieu and Henri Lefebvre in particular, to name the productive circuit between a contextually rich habitat and a disposition of bodily and cognitive habits.
In Lefebvre’s connotation, habitus speaks to how the production of social space is a kind of
mimetic extension of bodily movement, a habitual wearing of grooves into the surfaces of the
world, which by its material repetition produces the artifacts of habitat. In the plural, such spatial
practice results in the channels, monuments, and activities of the city, a collective artifact of
spatial life. Among the most important of such collective spatial productions is the border and
boundary of the city, the edge system of membranes that governs internalization and externalization. For the individual, habitus can also refer to how embodied dispositions become codified
into the organization of place and how this comes to reconfigure how they are occupied and
programmed in their reflective image. The repetition of habit produces an inscription, a “groove,”
in the figural contours of the built environment, and in fact it builds the environment precisely
through such repetitions, while habitats in turn produce and enunciate themselves though
bodies, manifested as habits. Spaces contain and constrain, and are configured by the bodies they
constrain. Spaces are not just expressions of embodiment; they also express themselves as and
through bodily form (prisoner, worker, individual, mass). Habitats (cage, desk, car, savannah,
bed, corridor) condition and are the condition of the production of bodily habits and of the collective representation of those habits fixing themselves as material culture.
In this circuit, Bourdieu identifies a crucial nexus of power. The cultural legitimacy of any sort
of regular exercise of power depends on how it can structure a part of society into its own shape,
according to its own program, and on its ability to then reproduce itself formally and institutionally. For Bourdieu, that reproduction decodes dynamics of social class, and certain patterns of
cultural capital—access, expertise, and information—replicate themselves over generations. The
sociological tradition from which Bourdieu worked understood technology as only enabling or
reflective of more essential social dynamics, whereas my own would situate as being indissoluble
from the genesis of complex material cultures (“social” and otherwise). Today the reflexively
reinforcing circuits of habitus are not only organized by software; they are also physically composed of software, literally built out of software-mediated interactions. In the activation on ambient interfacial fields of everyday life, software participates on both the habit and habitat sides of
the equation. As computation becomes an increasingly generic property of objects, software
envelops us with no greater novelty than electricity did decades before. In the interface’s predefined terms of action—the dispositions of inhabitation that it presents, on a screen or through
an object—software affords a reproducible form of habit, inhabitation, and practice. Between
Users, differential access to certain interfaces in certain combinations comes to define their individuated biographies within the wider production and reproduction of social capital and as a
function of the interfacial regimes that both consolidate and disseminate power. The Interface
layer of The Stack, especially as habitat, is a medium of cultural, technical, symbolic, and economic capital at once. As played out every second, from Bangalore to Boston, software acumen is
also access to the dispositions of practice it embodies, which in turn compose access to the frames
of reproductive capital-formations they afford.

Notes

425

42. The App’s real installed size varies somewhat with each device.
43. See for example the Qualcomm Tricorder XPrize. http://tricorder.xprize.org/. From the site’s
promotional copy: “Imagine a portable, wireless device in the palm of your hand that monitors
and diagnoses your health conditions. That’s the technology envisioned by this competition,
and it will allow unprecedented access to personal health metrics. The end result: Radical innovation in healthcare that will give individuals far greater choices in when, where, and how they
receive care.”
44. One version of this platform of and for nonhuman Users of Apps and App markets is partially
articulated as the industrial Internet. See Jon Bruner, “Defining the Industrial Internet,” O’Reilly
Radar, January 11, 2013, http://radar.oreilly.com/2013/01/defining-the-industrial-internet.html.
45. A variation perhaps on the death of affect. See Boris Groys, “Religion in the Age of Digital
Reproduction,” E-Flux, no. 4 (March 2009), http://worker01.e-flux.com/pdf/article_49.pdf, and
Groys, Google: Words Beyond Grammar (Hatje Cantz: Berlin, 2012).
46. During a personal conversation about this essay, “Religion in the Age of Digital Reproduction,” Boris Groys offered an argument regarding what he took to be the political theology of
Google. It was an anecdote about some of his Islamic students in Germany. His argument, developed in this short essay “is that the digital logic of infinite reproducibility (not of a substantial
image as in mechanical reproduction, but of a binary substance that is itself nothing but a potential formal pattern) is well suited to a flattening of the affect of religious experience into a kind of
rote, mechanistic exercise whereby the mere execution of a ritual program constitutes a supposedly successful theology. Most of his students, he said, had not really studied the Koran nor, he
presumes, experienced much of anything we might take to be an ecstatic vision of transcendent
truth through it or any other religious medium. Instead those who fancy themselves radicals
merely download entire radical websites, largely unread, and store them on their laptops. The
implication is that they needn’t be enthralled by the theocratic utopian energies of the actual
particulars, but merely to possess the imagery-discourse there contained, regardless of any unnecessary affective experience, and that this is not only sufficient but preferred. Simpler.
Groys’s remark, however, as distant from or attuned to the actual intentions of his students it
may be, is telling in the intellectual attitudes that it inverts. Foucault’s fascination with the function of Islam for the Left, not so much as a model of communitarian equity but simply as a wedge
in the door keeping the conceptual possibility of radical political difference from slamming shut,
was to see in political Shi’ism a heterological alternative to the cynical European Liberal doxa. It is
also a (perhaps more learned) variation on the predictable tendency to romanticize (both positively and negatively) the presumed depth of faith and conviction of jihadists, radicals, and especially suicide bombers. For this, “we” who are too cynical to believe in anything other than fatal
self-interest and the impossibility of something other than capitalist realism are in awe of the
resolved single-mindedness of “their” unwavering fanaticism. Their naiveté, so unencumbered
with the burden of postmodern nuance and ambivalence, signifies the remaining possibility of
actual, ecstatic effervescent experience in the direct midst of global malaise. As Slajov Žižek jokes,
“they have faith for us” in perfect inverted symmetry of our own secular disenchantment. But
this is perhaps very wrong. Quite apart from Mumbai, the suicidal assignment can be seen as the

426

Notes

expression not of certainty but of doubt, not as sacrifice but as evasion. While the bombers themselves have doubts, their suicide becomes a way of confirming their belief: “If I kill myself in this
way, I can calm my doubts and prove, even to me, that I do believe.” The act does not happen
because of the belief; the belief is retroactively testified by the reality of the act: from radical
conviction to autonomic nihilism to an eventual leap of faith.
Groys had developed the relationship between this tautological automatism and digital
media. He writes, “The modern age has not been the age in which the sacred has been abolished
but rather the age of its dissemination in profane space, its democratization, its globalization.
Ritual, repetition, and reproduction were hitherto matters of religion; they were practiced in isolated, sacred places. In the modern age, ritual, repetition, and reproduction have become the fate
of the entire world, of the entire culture.” Our question then is whether this constitutes something like a ubiquity or dissolution of the utopian along with a ubiquity and dissolution of the
religious culture within global network. Groys’s position is affirmative, but for a particular
version of what the utopian means that is in some ways the opposite of Adorno and Jameson’s
uses. “The significance of the Enlightenment was not so much that it resulted in the complete
disappearance of religion, but that religion became a matter of private choice, which then
resulted in the withdrawal of religion into the private sphere. In the contemporary world, religion has become a matter of private taste, functioning in much the same way as do art and
design.” And in this, we would argue, political theology is linked more directly to the
politicization of affect as the basis of its legitimacy. For Groys, this is linked intrinsically to the
solipsism of the Internet unwinding the reason of deliberate authority, as “the Internet favors
private, unconditional, sovereign freedom over scientific, conditional, institutional freedom.” In
other words, “The slogan of the previous age was, “The private is political, whereas the true
slogan of the Internet is, the political is private.” See Groys, “Religion in the Age of Digital
Reproduction.”
47. The effect is drawn not only from the solipsism of information and opinion but from an
automatism necessarily at work in the algorithmic recombinancy of the digital. Groys sees in this
a dense synthesis of the ritual logic of religion: “I would argue, however, that religion—any religion—is not a set of opinions but primarily a set of rituals, and that the religious ritual refers to a
state in which there is a lack of opinions, a state of opinionlessness—a doxa—for it refers to the
will of the gods or of God ultimately concealed from the opinions of mortals.” The ritual and its
repetition are not executed as the spontaneous expression of numinous insight but, “as such, is
neither true, nor false. In this sense it marks the zero point of freedom of opinion, that is, freedom from any kind of opinion, from the obligation to have an opinion.” And isn’t it this opposition between what two experiences of the religious—the repetition of the spirit and the
meaningful core of a religious concept on the one hand, and the mechanical carrying out of
formal recitation on the other, “between living spirit and dead letter”—that structures our discourses on religion? What is the political form of this recitation? “This is precisely what fundamentalism is, namely, the insistence on the letter as opposed to the spirit.” Whereas for Adorno
and Jameson, the utopian is that which properly precedes and exceeds any possibility of positive
inscription, Groys demands instead that “it is for this reason that religious fundamentalism has
always possessed a revolutionary dimension: while breaking with the politics of spirit, that is,

Notes

427

with the politics of reform, flexibility, and adaptation to the zeitgeist, it goes on to substitute for
this politics of spirit the violent politics of the letter.”
With the reality of planetary computation and the governmental challenges it poses, what do
we make of the idea that “religious ritual is the prototype of the mechanical reproduction that
dominated Western culture during the modern period, and which, to a certain degree, continues
to dominate the contemporary world. What this suggests is that mechanical reproduction might,
in its turn, be understood as a religious ritual. It is for this reason that fundamentalist religious
movements have become so successful in our time, for they combine religious ritual with
mechanical reproduction”? Is this to contradict Baudrillard’s insistence that there can be no utopian function with the realization that there cannot not be actualized utopian space, but that the
utopian is pure function and that pure function is utopian? For Groys, any affect of the projective
utopian image is not the solemn duty of religio, the sacrality of the return within religious mediation, but in this digital nihilism a response drawn only from the desubjectifying solipsism of the
instant sensation of repetition, the diagram of roteness, and the calming abdication that comes
with machinic iteration. See Groys, “Religion in the Age of Digital Reproduction.”
48. For example, Can Dialectics Break Bricks? (directed by René Viénet, 1973), though it is Atom
Egoyan and Ian Balfour who have provided the most applicable analysis of the subtitle and the
production and mitigation of the experience of a “foreign” image, in Atom Egoyan and Ian Balfour, Subtitles: On the Foreignness of Film (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004).
49. Christian Metz, The Imaginary Signifier: Psychoanalysis and the Cinema (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1982).
50. This is the basis for seeing the diagrammatics of information visualization operating as a
utopian-projective discourse for the image-interface yet to come, as the deepest worldly recombinancy shifts from the linear temporal unfolding of metahistory to the nonlinear spatial unfolding of meta-interfaciality.
51. It’s impossible then to avoid the comparison with Žižek’s well-worn reading of John Carpenter’s science-fiction film They Live (1988) in which certain characters can, by wearing special ideology-filtering Ray-Bans, perceive that Earth (or Los Angeles, at least) is controlled by skinless
reptile aliens and that humans live in a state of somnambulant delirium. See, for one example,
Slavoj Žižek, “Through the Glasses Darkly,” In These Times, October 29, 2008, http://inthesetimes.
com/article/3976/through_the_glasses_darkly. Regarding AR then, the wearing of glasses instead
of allowing us to wake from “false consciousness” allows users to choose which subscription hallucination they prefer. After Žižek, we might say, “Yes, AR looks as if people are strapping ideological reductions onto their face, but don’t be fooled; they really are.”
52. It is said that at the end of the rainbow, there is a pot of gold. Where that end is, however,
poses a problem, since it is different for every observer. The rainbow is actually a distorted virtual
image of the sun. Nevertheless, it looks like a real object. Could it be that similar distortions
apply to other “real” objects? Otto E. Rossler and Peter Weibel, “Our Rainbow World,” in The
World from Within—Endo and Nano: Ars Electronica 92, ed. Karl Gerbel and Katharina Gsöllpointner (Vienna: PVS Verleger, 1992). Also republished in Peter Weibel, ed., Olafur Eliasson: Surroundings Surrounded—Essays on Space and Science (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001), 504.

428

Notes

53. See Kietchi Matsuda’s cinematic visualizations of AR’s cinematic visualization of everyday
habits/habitats, Augmented Kitchen and Augmented City: “Augmented (hyper)Reality: Augmented City,” http://www.keiichimatsuda.com/augmentedcity.php.
54. Ingress, https://www.ingress.com/.
55. Terrorism’s symbolic economy not only seeks out targets with some meaningful and representative value, but in doing so, it also imbues certain sites with symbolic currency through
the act of design violence itself. Game scenarios like Ingress validate the insight that indeed
“everywhere is a target, and everywhere is symbolic.” See also Sam Jacob’s essay in Domus, http://
www.domusweb.it/en/op-ed/everywhere-is-a-target-everywhere-is-symbolic/.
56. The age of television, the Apollo program, and baby boomers brought us Scientology, Esalen,
and televangelism. What bizarre new theological regimes will AR bring?
57. See my “On Geoscapes and Google Caliphate: Except #Mumbai,” Theory, Culture and Society
26 (2009): 329–342.
58. The other “smart mob” of nonstate actors in the Mumbai attacks were those trapped by the
chaos and carnage in hotel rooms, closets, cafés, and whatever other refuge they could find. The
only lifeline available to many was their mobile handset, and in the crisis, they put these to use
to coordinate their defense and flight. As events unfolded, I sat in my office in California watching the #Mumbai Twitter feed chronicling real-time first-person reports of what was happening:
“hospital update: shots still being fired,” “also Metro cinema next door,” “blood needed at JJ
hospital.” “We’re in Ruggate Cafe, where should we go?” Mainstream media outlets were left
flat-footed, their anchors just repeating both fact and rumor from these feeds on air and in print.
Interestingly the US military almost predicted this. The army issued a report the month before
warning that “al-Qaeda-like” terrorists might use Twitter to coordinate an attack. Instead Twitter
became a way to mobilize a response to terrorist violence (reconnaissance, situational awareness,
logistics) by civilians. This telematic stigmergy was most definitely not included in use cases
that Twitter concocted in advance of their launch, but is as instructive a political, urban, geographic “accidental” technology as Lashkar-e-Taiba’s appropriation of Google Earth, satellite
phones, and GPS.
59. In his short story “Maneki Neko,” Bruce Sterling describes the everyday world of a Japanese
“entity” that might be described as the mixture of a cell-phone-based AR game, an omniscient
artificial intelligence, a karmic futures market, and a disruptive new cult theology: navigation,
software, religion. Bruce Sterling, “Maneki Neko,” Lightspeed Magazine, no. 11 (April 2011), http://
www.lightspeedmagazine.com/fiction/maneki-neko/. The flabbergasted Japanese-American cop
trying to break up the ring chastises her captive: “We computer cops have names for you kinds of
people. Digital panarchies. Segmented, polycephalous, integrated influence networks. What
about all these free goods and services you’re getting all this time?” No reply. “Do you pay taxes?”
No reply. She barks: “Well, your network gift economy is undermining the lawful, governmentapproved, regulated economy!” “I’m just living my life,” he sheepishly replies just as whatever it
is steers a superswarm of mayhem down on the cops, strangers instructed to mob their escape
routes, automatic doors closing, phones and elevators inexplicably going dead. The whole digital

Notes

429

world it seems is accessible to this unnamed sentient agency to decide and keep benevolent order,
instructing strangers to deliver precise gifts to each other at just the right moment or foil dumbfounded IT security police.
In a blog entry about iTACITUS Reality Filtering, a European Union–commissioned, intelligent tourism project that provides a smart-phone-based AR narrative to many of Europe’s key
heritage sites, Sterling posts, “Fantastic to see history made so atemporally flexible, eh? Since it’s
necessary to get cynical (‘Always Look at the Underside First’) let’s get cynical about this technology and it’s trajectory. This ‘true glimpse’ of history won’t sell well, compared to Disneyfied
‘untrue glimpses.’ Wherever there is ‘Intelligent Tourism,’ brutal, vulgar and stupid tourism follows fast on its heels! Soon we’ll have some theme park Creationist Augmented Reality, where
you can visit the Grand Canyon and see pre-Noachian people pan-frying trilobites and riding
dinosaurs.” See Sterling’s post, “Augmented Reality and Atemporality,” Wired, August 15, 2009,
http://www.wired.com/2009/08/augmented-reality-and-atemporality/.
60. The App has received considerable mainstream press. See Amy O’Leary, “In the Beginning
Was the Word; Now the Word Is on an App,” New York Times, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/
07/27/technology/the-faithful-embrace-youversion-a-bible-app.html?hp, and Nir Eyal, “This
Mobile App Is Already on 100 Million Devices But Its Goal Isn’t to Make Money,” Quartz, July 25,
2013, http://qz.com/107969/this-mobile-app-is-already-on-100-million-devices-but-its-goal-isnt
-to-make-money/.
61. Regardless of the computational architecture of The Stack, geoscapes do not in principle
require anything like modern interfaces to organize geographical antagonisms. Surely maps are
already precomputational interfaces that conceived a world image and world space striated by
longitude and latitude possible for their sacred and secular imperium, and which by their notation indexed what spaces were full and which were empty, and how to get there from here. In the
latent theological imperative of AR, are nothing so much as late medieval afterimages now ported
to the optical technologies of artificial interfacial vision?
62. This public, huddled around their transistor radios, is not so unlike the bourgeois family
huddled around the radio in May Fools, Louis Malle’s 1990 film about May ’68, or the thousands
of soixante-huitards in the streets of Paris listening to broadcasts from Radio Luxembourg at the
beginning of May, and then to de Gaulle, once more, on television at the beginning of June. May
Fools (directed by Louis Malle, Pyramide Distribution, 1990).
63. In one key scene, a little boy commandeers the French army’s public address system to rally
his beleaguered countrymen, assuming the mantle of the Voice of Fighting Algeria, as the VFA
commandeered the narrative of democratic self-determination.
64. Frantz Fanon, A Dying Colonialism (New York: Grove Press, 1967), 84–88.
65. The modeling of “persuasive interfaces” has been a particularly successful form of interaction
design consulting (in financial terms) promising to train Users and consumers away from undesirable actions (eating too much) and toward desirable ones (buying stuff). Far too many evangelize
this research area with a startling lack of self-awareness and appropriate scope. In many cases
(surely not all), the conclusions on offer may resemble, to the untrained eye, plain-old

430

Notes

behavioralist microeconomics with all its shallow psychologisms intact, now dressed up in the
millennial business jargon 2.0 of digital self-actualization.
66. “In mid-2014, the group released a video entitled ‘The End of Sykes-Picot’ featuring an English-speaking Chilean national named Abu Safiyya. The video announced the group’s intention
to eliminate all modern borders between Islamic Middle Eastern countries; this was a reference to
the borders set by the Sykes-Picot Agreement during World War I.” See Global Islamic Media
Front (GIMF), Wikipedia, October 4, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_Islamic_Media
_Front_(GIMF).
67. This is so even if those narratives are actually based on the postnarrative aesthetics of databases, as developed, for example, in Hiroki Azuma, Otaku: Japan’s Database Animals (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 2009).
68. These examples chosen should in no way be taken to imply a unique association between
Islam and the sort of politico-theologic violence described. Certainly any variant of Abrahamic
monotheism could offer up case studies for us. There are other research projects that examine the
relationship between Islam and the GUIs that are much more rigorous than my scans of convenience. For example, Laura Marks’s work on Islam and interfaces is instructive of the specific
relationship between Islamic modes of art and inscription and the nested swirls of intra-signification in GUIs. See her Enfoldment and Infinity: An Islamic Genealogy of New Media Art (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2010). Construed in the context of this essay, it would suggest that the Islamist
activation of the interfacial image as a geo-graphic medium is less a modern appropriation than a
historical continuity of formal visual syntax “in which image, information, and the infinite interact: image is an interface to information, and information (such as computer code or the words
of the Qur’an) is an interface to the infinite.” She writes, “An aniconic turn is stirring the contemporary visual and media arts. Less and less is present to perception; more and more is latent, in
quiet surfaces that seem to be ‘hiding something in the image.’ The latent image waits to be
‘unfolded,’ either subjectively, by the viewer, or by the force of its interior logic. Figural images
are increasingly being subordinated to information, performativity, communication, and other
relatively nonvisual contents. This contemporary aniconic tendency, a general movement in the
arts of information societies, occurs particularly with computer-based art. One of the origins of
this aniconic tendency in contemporary art is the influence of Islamic art and thought on Western modernism. Fascinating subject though it is, the Islamic genealogy of Western modernism is
not my focus in the present essay. It does, however, inform my claim here that the parallels
between tendencies in contemporary computer art and tendencies in classical Islamic art are not
happenstance but the manifestation of historical connections. In turn, this Islamic genealogy of
Western modernism should make it possible to examine contemporary computer-based art in
light of the impressive variety of philosophical questions and aesthetic solutions found in the
varied works of Islamic art of past centuries.”
69. Consider by analogy the strange story of three schizophrenic patients who all believed themselves to be Jesus Christ and were placed in the same room to proclaim their divinity to one
another. Milton Rokeach, The Three Christs of Ypsilanti: A Psychological Study (New York: Knopf,
1964).

Notes

431

70. Is it curious that Google Earth and Maps, perhaps the most aggressively secular, pluralistic,
universalizing cosmopolitan mapping technology realized to date, would serve at the center of
this antisecular, antidemocratic politico-theological paroxysm? The attacks in Mumbai were,
in the parlance of counterinsurgency, both irregular and asymmetrical. They were irregular in
that the combatants were apparently armed civilian tourists rampaging through civilian spaces
until the siege of uniformed men turned up, and asymmetrical in that the city (its buildings, its
tourists, its state institutions) was assigned characterization by these armed tourists in a fight to
which they did not know themselves enrolled. (Perhaps this is one social definition of terrorism:
war fought against enemy-people who do not consider themselves enemy-combatants, and
then as well largely against their architectural habitat as much as their persons.) Within this, the
Mumbai event was an unwelcome innovation on more than one level. It was a highly coordinated but direct personal attack on the soft, leisurely substance of civil society more than on
hard military or politically symbolic targets, looking more like what the Malay and Javanese
call amuk (amok), than any Clausewitzian opposition of equals. Second, we see the strategic
employment of locative social media and personal mapping technologies for the C3 (commandcontrol-communicate) project of mayhem. It is less Netwar (Samuel Weber’s term; such as the
pulsing of logistics of a denial-of-service attacks on Estonia’s systems by Russian nationalists)
than of a social/locative media-enabled swarming maneuver, both of and on the city engaged as
itself a network of real and symbolic interfaces and here overrun by the capacities of real-time,
collaborative situational awareness.
It precedes the Arab Spring and the Google doctrine by a few years, but it may represent a
more essential lesson regarding the conjunction of mobile computing and urban spatial politics.
A major source of unease (if not shock) for many in the liberal West was the souring of the
Thomas Friedman-esque supposition that the cosmopolitan cognitive apparatus that is Google
Earth must surely provide a world picture that is so open, objective, materialist, dialogic—and
perhaps because so absent of visible human bodies that might invite contentious biopolitics—
that it could not possibly be compatible, interoperable, instrumental with the closed, naturalist,
idealist imagined collective geography of jihadist Islam. Isn’t Google Earth exemplary of all that
makes the secular, technological pluralism of the West intolerable to fundamentalist institutions?
It is a blank, purified vision of a planet somehow constructed as an objective integrated context
onto and into which history might work, and simultaneously agnostic as to how anything arrives
in its place or why. The jolt invited confused speculation about how “a new reality” in the spatial
warfare of globalization had revealed itself: “they” are not immune to “our” most central terms
and things because our modernity is also “theirs.” “We do not control even what we control,”
goes the lament.
71. Many of the most impressive interfaces are seen in science-fiction movies where they play a
starring role to draw out the contours of fictional worlds. The Los Angeles–based studio oooii has
developed many of the best. See http://www.oooii.com. Earlier historical examples of “future
interfaces” can be found at the blog Paleofuture. The shift seen here in pop futurist media from
pulp stories and architectural drawings to corporate-funded users from tomorrow is telling in and
of itself. In the early 1990s, I wrote about a particularly cringe-worthy video, Connections: AT&T’s
Vision of the Future, a story about how videoconferencing, fashion avatars, reversed-translation
software, and holographic visualization will provide for so many good things: finding a good

432

Notes

spouse, resolving intergenerational conflicts, not to mention architectural preservation. More
recent examples focus on future health care, placing more attention on the soft pastel palettes
and extra-light typefaces to suggest a world in which better UI is part of a safe, affluent lifestyle,
and a central focus for domestic interior design. Health care is remade as a project of constant
real-time self-regard and expert information management. Here the principal promise and
achievement of the interfacial regime is to seal the biological habitat, policing risk and disorder
with graceful gestures and visualizations. For a useful index, see Nelson Shedroff and Christopher
Noessel, Make It So: Interaction Design Lessons from Science Fiction (Brooklyn, NY: Rosenfeld Media,
2012).
72. For a particularly beautiful example of a projective augmented reality dreamworld-interfacegeography, see Factory Fifteen, “GOLDEN AGE—SOMEWHERE,” http://www.factoryfifteen
.com/7936/152396/home/golden-age-somewhere.
The process by which software comes to configure User cognition is familiar to anyone who
has taken the time to learn a particularly difficult application, but the principle holds for everyday tools as well. An architecture student who is struggling to learn Maya will be frustrated by the
disconnect between her idea and her ability to realize that idea with the application’s powerful
but confusing GUI. Over time, however, she begins to internalize the logics of geometry, force,
distortion, and iteration that underlie the software. Rotation and manipulation of virtual forms
become increasingly habitual. Instead of slowly translating between idea, hand movement, and
on-screen outcome, the feedback cycle becomes faster and more intuitive. She is internalizing the
cognitive schema of the program, which is now not only expressing her ideas more fluidly; it has
begun to inform that ideation process in the first place. As she becomes a more expert User, she
will learn to “think” in Maya and use the application not just to output her original inspirations
but as a collaborator in the design of forms that are possible only once the different abilities of
her creative and interpretive intelligence and its machinic intelligence are correlated. That correlation entails a process of forgetting—of forgetting the translation, the hand movements, the
arbitrary qualities of how a GUI categorizes possible combinations of gestures made and scripts
executed. The software is habituated, and the acumen that allows that software to generate capital for the User is itself a function of that habituation. As those habitations become more intense
and widely shared—in this case, among a community of designers—the terms, vernaculars,
limits, and liabilities of a software application also inform how the User-designer comes to see
what the software is meant to simulate and describe—in this case, buildings and cities. One
comes to look at cities as variations on what can and can’t be done with the tools one has habituated for the design of cities.
This is not meant as a criticism of creative ingenuity, rather a simple observation that there is
no thinking that is not also topological and, for this, also technological. Software is not unique in
this or excluded from it. In relation to Heidegger’s notion of “equipment,” we also observe that
we, the Users, “unforget” that habituation when the technology breaks. Busted hardware or
glitchy software draws our attention out of focused concentration and back to the strange
mechanics of the apparatus, seeing it again a bit more as we did as a beginner. For any interfacial
regime, the ambient field of interfaces made available to a User is a different kind of “distribution
of the sensible,” one in which visual and tactical interfaces, both graphical and objective, constitute a habitat of possible applications with which one makes the world in the best way available.

Notes

433

In this, intelligence is objectified in the permutations of action, interaction, calculation, visualization, interpretation, and power that arrange this arrangement. As we see, the Interface layer is
not only the prism through which the User sees and accesses the other layers of The Stack; it is
also the membrane throughout which the other layers, the Cloud layer in particular, observe and
access the User.

User Layer
1. Michel Foucault and Michel Senellart, The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the College
̀ de France,
1978–79 (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008).
2. Peter Watts, “The Things,” Clarkesworld Magazine, no. 40 (January 2010), http://clarkesworldmagazine.com/watts_01_10/.
3. “The high road to thinking no longer passes through a deepening of human cognition, but
rather through a becoming inhuman of cognition, a migration of cognition out into the emerging planetary technosentience reservoir, into dehumanized landscapes, emptied spaces where
human culture will be dissolved. Just as the capitalist urbanization of labour abstracted it in a
parallel escalation with technical machines, so will intelligence be transplanted into the purring
data zones of new software worlds in order to be abstracted from an increasingly obsolescent
anthropoid particularity.” Nick Land, “Circuitries,” Pli: Warwick Journal of Philosophy, no. 4 (October 1992): 217–235.
4. Benedict Singleton, “On Craft and Being Crafty” (Ph.D. dissertation, Northumbria University,
2014).
5. David A. Mindell, Digital Apollo Human and Machine in Spaceflight (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2008).
6. In this regard, Alphonso Cuaron’s film Gravity (2013) can be read as a very liberal adaptation
of Sloterdijk’s Spheres trilogy.
7. Singleton, “On Craft and Being Crafty.”
8. See the discussion of Wilfrid Sellars in Ray Brassier, “Nominalism, Naturalism, and Materialism,” and Jon Cogburn, “Ray Brassier on Sellars (hat Tip Leon Niemoczynski),” New APPS: Art,
Politics, Philosophy, Science (blog), June 13, 2013, http://www.newappsblog.com/2013/06/
ray-brassier-on-sellars-hat-tip-leon-niemoczynsk.html.
9. Use case scenarios are translated into functional requirements for software and hardware systems according to the demands of informal user-centered design methods, often according to
formal systems like UML (Unified Modeling Language) or IBM’s Rational.
10. Alan Cooper helped pioneer the use of use case personas for Internet-era GUI design in his
The Inmates Are Running the Asylum: Why High Tech Products Drive Us Crazy and How to Restore the
Sanity (Carmel, Indiana: SAMS Publishing, 1998).

434

Notes

11. Recall Massimo d’Azeglio’s quip from 1861, commonly paraphrased as, “We have made Italy.
Now we must make Italians.”
12. “The Urban Pavilion, World Expo Shanghai: Herman Kossmann,” PICNIC, http://www
.picnicnetwork.org/herman-kassmann.
13. For a historical survey of Sino-futurism in the context of the expo, see Nick Land, Shanghai
Expo Guide 2010 (Shanghai: Urbanatomy, 2010).
14. Agamben quoting Foucault in Giorgio Agamben, What Is an Apparatus?: And Other Essays
(Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 2009).
15. Saul Griffith, “PopTech 2008: Saul Griffith” (lecture at PopTech 2008, Camden, ME, 2008),
http://vimeo.com/7081438.
16. Referring to Roland Barthes, “The Death of the Author,” in Image, Music, Text, trans. Stephen
Heath (New York: Hill and Wang, 1977).
17. Referring to De Landa’s definition of an “assemblage,” for which a component retains
some autonomy that would allow it to participate in other assemblages by realizing a different
function.
18. Zoe Kleinman, “Chinese Dad Hires Virtual Hitmen,” BBC News, January 7, 2013, http://www
.bbc.com/news/technology-20931304.
19. In a similar vein, see Richard Adhikari, “Art Prof Lets World Peer through His Surgically
Embedded 3rd Eye,” TechNewsWorld, December 6, 2010, http://www.technewsworld.com/
story/71377.html.
20. Until the End of the World, directed by Wim Wenders (Warner Brothers, 1991).
21. See Nicholas Felton’s work at http://feltron.com/.
22. Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1980).
23. The overlapping territories between early computer culture and the counterculture imagined
the potential in global cybernetics to provide various dissolutions of the self into recursive networks. Fred Turner, From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth Network, and
the Rise of Digital Utopianism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006).
24. Bruno Latour, “The Tarde Durkheim Debate,” http://www.bruno-latour.fr/node/354.
25. Jon Cohen, “The Patient of the Future,” MIT Technology Review, February 21, 2012, http://
www.technologyreview.com/featuredstory/426968/the-patient-of-the-future/.
26. Antonio Regalado, “Stephen Wolfram Adds Analytics to the Quantified-Self Movement,”
MIT Technology Review, May 8, 2013, http://www.technologyreview.com/news/514356/
stephen-wolfram-on-personal-analytics/.

Notes

435

27. Scott F. Gilbert, Jan Sapp, and Alfred I. Tauber, “A Symbiotic View of Life: We Have Never
Been Individuals,” Quarterly Review of Biology 87 (2012): 325–341, doi:10.1086/668166.
28. On the use of artificial intelligence to analyze large quantities of health data, see, for example,
“Lee Hood Group,” Institute for Systems Biology, https://www.systemsbiology.org/hood-group.
29. Not so unlike the Earth-figure-cursor rotating its way around the panoramic territory of its
own location, leaving a trail of data visualizations along its path in Exit visualizations for the
Native Land exhibition, discussed below.
30. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, An Aesthetic Education in the Era of Globalization (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 2012).
31. A tweet from Xeni Jardin @xeni: “Wondering if (when) a future Son of Sam will blame his
evil deeds on a Fitbit he believed to be flashing murderous command prompts.”
32. Two thoughts: “I understand why Freud constructed his first psychology on the model of the
electrostatisticians. I am not explaining Jules Verne by Freud; I am explaining Freud by the electricity of Verne. It’s so much more amusing, and what’s more, truer. Verne says the same thing.
Verne says that it is the same thing to describe a condenser and to liberate its discharge as to
translate a coded message into clear terms. Freud stated it, Verne had already recounted it.”
Serres, “Jules Verne” (1975); and “We are taught that corporations have a soul, which is the most
terrifying news in the world,” Deleuze, “Postscript on Societies of Control” (1990).
33. Eduardo Mendieta, “A Letter on Überhumanismus: Beyond Posthumanism and Transhumanism.” in Sloterdijk Now, ed. Stuart Elden (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2012).
34. Agamben, What Is an Apparatus?, 14.
35. Ibid, 15.
36. Ibid, 17.
37. Giorgio Agamben, The Open: Man and Animal (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2003).
38. The currency of mediated prosthesis in the 1960s was by no means limited to McLuhan. John
McHale proposed an image of architecture as an assembly of prostheses for plural bodies and
compound subjectivities that would, on local and global scales, extend their embodiments into
the world into and against its expanded ecologies: “It is not that social life deploys various technologies to sustain itself or that social life can be found within technological space. Rather, social
life can only reside in prosthetic accessories. As McHale puts it, man is a social animal only
through his extensions.” John McHale, The Future of the Future (New York: Braziller, 1969). For
McHale, modernity is itself a complex of prostheticizations, a global field in which the subjective
agency of the human body is extended into a global “house” of communications media, transportation, architecture, medicine, ingestive imagery and instrumentality, and so on. It is both an
amplification and a diversification of the organism and the species, “a fundamental transformation of the morphological and social condition of humanity.” “The distinction between body
and space soon collapses. In ecological terms, human flesh is but a transitional event in the

436

Notes

continuous redistribution of energy.” John McHale, The Ecological Context (New York: Braziller,
1970). See also Amerigo Marras, ECO-TEC: Architecture of the In-Between (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
Architectural Press, 1999), 40.
39. Cary Wolfe, “‘Life’: Neovitalism and Biopolitical Thought” (lecture at the Forum on the
Humanities and the Public World, Berkeley, CA, September 15, 2011), https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v XztJjdLCeRs. Donna Haraway “From Cyborgs to Companion Species: Dogs, People,
and Technoculture” (lecture at the Townsend Center for the Humanities, Berkeley, CA, 2011)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v Q9gis7-Jads. Dominic Pettman, Human Error: Species-Being
and Media Machines (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011).
40. Garnet Hertz, “Cockroach Controlled Mobile Robot: Control and Communication in the
Animal and the Machine,” Conceptlab.coma, http://www.conceptlab.com/roachbot/.
41. Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger: An Analysis of the Concepts of Pollution and Taboo (London:
Routledge, 2002).
42. Benjamin H. Bratton, Natalie Jeremijenko, Laura Forland, and Dharma Dailey, Suspicious
Images, Latent Interfaces (New York: Architectural League of New York, 2009). In this I write that
effects such as these are exemplary of “the death of the user” because it puts at stake not how a
human might react ethically or unethically toward a situation from her central position in local
or smaller systems, but the way in which the ubiquitous, pervasive systems comprise an ecology
where parts of the natural system relate and co-govern directly with other parts at a distance
without requiring the agency of the human to intervene or mediate. The techno-ecology works
without users. We are designing our own abdication.
43. Nanowerk LLC, “Rise of the Ultrafast Machine Ecology,” Nanowerk, September 11, 2013,
http://www.nanowerk.com/news2/robotics/newsid 32214.php?utm_source feedburner&utm.
44. Her, directed by Spike Jonze (Annapurna Pictures, 2013).
45. American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed.
(Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
46. Dominic Basulto, “Is the Internet Becoming the Bot Net?,” Big Think, April 2, 2012, http://
bigthink.com/endless-innovation/is-the-internet-becoming-the-bot-net.
47. In carbon footprinting all things, sentient or dumb, are comparable. The robot replaces the
expensive worker, the inexpensive worker replaces the expensive robot, the even more inexpensive desktop fabrication network replaces the inexpensive worker, and so on.
48. See Intuitive Surgical, “Da Vinci … Changing the Experience of Surgery,” Da Vinci Surgery,
December 2013, http://www.davincisurgery.com/; K. Grant, “MDARS: Multiple Robot Host
Architecture,” SPAWAR, July 10, 1995, http://users.isr.ist.utl.pt/~jseq/ResearchAtelier/misc/
MDARS%20Multiple%20Robot%20Host%20Architecture.htm.
49. Interview with Joan Didion in Shotgun Freeway: Drives through Lost L.A., directed by Morgan
Neville and Harry Pallenberg (King Pictures, 1995).

Notes

437

50. Reyner Banham Loves Los Angeles, directed by Reyner Banham (1972).
51. Benjamin H. Bratton, “iPhone City (v.2008),” in Digital Cities AD: Architectural Design 79,
no. 4 (2009): 90–97.
52. Elon Musk and SpaceX, “Hyperloop Alpha,” August 12, 2013, http://www.spacex.com/sites/
spacex/files/hyperloop_alpha-20130812.pdf.
53. Vicky Validakis, “Rio’s Driverless Trucks Move 100 Million Tonnes,” Australian Mining, April
24, 2013, http://www.miningaustralia.com.au/news/rio-s-driverless-trucks-move-100-million
-tonnes.
54. Bruno Latour, Aramis, or the Love of Technology (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1993).
55. Sebastian Thrun, “Google’s Driverless Car,” TED, March 2011, http://www.ted.com/talks/
sebastian_thrun_google_s_driverless_car. The relative “autonomy” of the car from the driver is a
gradient. The design problem is not one of full autonomy of the car replacing full autonomy of
the driver, but of varying degrees of cyborgization, drawing on those with which car culture is
already comfortable.
56. Steven Levy, In the Plex: How Google Thinks, Works, and Shapes Our Lives (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 2011).
57. For those who honestly don’t know, the Google driverless car project is a research initiative
to develop cars that can autonomously navigate all roads without human steerage (or much of
it), using a combination of laser-guided mapping, video cameras, radar, motion sensors, on-board
computing, and other tools. Prototypes to date have mostly used a customized Prius, though the
company recently announced plans to work with auto manufacturers to build autonomous vehicles to Google’s own specifications, and some early products could be commercially available in a
few years, if some very wicked problems can be worked out first. On these see Lee Gomes,
“Hidden Obstacles for Google’s Self-Driving Cars,” MIT Technology Review, August 28, 2014.
58. Levy again: “Why is OpenFlow so advantageous to a company like Google? In the traditional
model you can think of routers as akin to taxicabs getting passengers from one place to another.
If a street is blocked, the taxi driver takes another route—but the detour may be time-consuming.
If the weather is lousy, the taxi driver has to go slower. In short, the taxi driver will get you there,
but you don’t want to bet the house on your exact arrival time.
“With the software-defined network Google has implemented, the taxi situation no longer
resembles the decentralized model of drivers making their own decisions. Instead you have a
system like the one envisioned when all cars are autonomous, and can report their whereabouts
and plans to some central repository which also knows of weather conditions and aggregate traffic information. Such a system doesn’t need independent taxi drivers, because the system knows
where the quickest routes are and what streets are blocked, and can set an ideal route from the
outset. The system knows all the conditions and can institute a more sophisticated set of
rules that determines how the taxis proceed, and even figure whether some taxis should stay in
their garages while fire trucks pass.” Steven Levy, “Going with the Flow: Google’s Secret Switch to

438

Notes

the Next Wave of Networking,” Wired.com, April 15, 2012, http://www.wired.com/2012/04/
going-with-the-flow-google/all/.
59. John Thackara, “Lightness,” in In the Bubble: Designing in a Complex World (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2005), 18–19: “Power tools are another example. The average consumer power tool is
used for ten minutes in its entire life—but it takes hundreds of times its own weight to manufacture such an object. Why own one, if I can get ahold of one when I need it? A product-service
system provides me with access to the products, tools, opportunities, and capabilities I need to
get the job done—namely, power tools for me to use, but not own.”
60. Based on a working presumption that the “glass” in Google Glass—or some daughter technology with longer-term traction—would also be well suited to windshields, another group of
students developed a prototype suite of geolocative augmented reality games to be played by
passengers in cars sharing nearby locations on the road through vehicle-to-vehicle networks.
From this, other applications are easy to imagine, from the mundane (videoconferencing) to the
whimsical (site-specific virtual flora and fauna superimposed over the passing outlines of the
landscape) to the ugly (advertising-supported toll routes). See also Ryan Lawler, “Dispatch
from the Future: Uber to Purchase 2,500 Driverless Cars from Google,” TechCrunch, April
25, 2013, http://techcrunch.com/2013/08/25/uberauto/. Chunka Mui, “Dispatch from 2023:
Google Considers Buying 250,000 Driverless Cars from Tesla, but Buys Tesla Instead,” Forbes,
August 29, 2013, http://www.forbes.com/sites/chunkamui/2013/08/29/dispatch-from-2023
-google-considers-buying-250000-driverless-cars-from-tesla-but-buys-tesla-instead/.
61. Gary Marcus, “Moral Machines,” New Yorker, November 24, 2012, http://www.newyorker
.com/news/news-desk/moral-machines.
62. Nick Bilton, “Disruptions: As New Targets for Hackers, Your Car and Your House,” New
York Times, August 11, 2013, http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com//2013/08/11/taking-over-cars-and
-homes-remotely/.
63. See, for example, Jaron Lanier, Who Owns the Future? (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2013).
64. See Danielle Citron, “Bright Ideas: Anita Allen’s Unpopular Privacy,” Concurring Opinions,
January 13, 2012, http://www.concurringopinions.com/archives/2012/01/bright-ideas-anita
-allens-unpopular-privacy.html.
65. Jacob Applebaum, Andy Mueller-Maguhn, Jeremie Zimmermann, and Julian Assange, “Episode 8, Part 1,” WikiLeaks World Tomorrow, April 2012, https://worldtomorrow.wikileaks.org/
episode-8.html.
If you look at it from a market perspective, I’m convinced that there is a market in privacy that has been mostly
left unexplored, so maybe there will be an economic drive for companies to develop tools that will give users the in-dividual ability to control their data and communication. Maybe this is one way that we can solve
that problem. I’m not sure it can work alone, but this may happen and we may not know it yet. —Jeremie
Zimmermann

Philip Mirowski writes that “the Incredible Disappearing Agent has had all sorts of implications for neoliberal political theory. First off, the timeworn conventional complaint that economics is too pigheadedly methodologically individualist does not begin to scratch the neoliberal

Notes

439

program. ‘Individuals’ are merely evanescent projects from a neoliberal perspective. Neoliberalism has consequently become a scale-free Theory of Everything: something as small as a gene or
as large as a nation-state is equally engaged in entrepreneurial strategic pursuit of advantage,
since the ‘individual’ is no longer a privileged ontological platform. Second, there are no more
‘classes’ in the sense of an older political economy, since every individual is both employer and
worker simultaneously; in the limit, every man should be his own business firm or corporation;
this has proven a powerful tool for disarming whole swathes of older left discourse. It also appropriates an obscure historical development in American legal history—that the corporation is tantamount to personhood—and blows it up to an ontological principle. Third, since property is no
longer rooted in labor, as in the Lockean tradition, consequently property rights can be readily
reengineered and changed to achieve specific political objectives; one observes this in the area of
‘intellectual property,’ or in a development germane to the crisis, ownership of the algorithms
that define and trade obscure complex derivatives, and better, to reduce the formal infrastructure
of the marketplace itself to a commodity. Indeed, the recent transformation of stock exchanges
into profit-seeking IPOs was a critical neoliberal innovation leading up to the crisis. Classical liberals treated ‘property’ as a sacrosanct bulwark against the state; neoliberals do not. Fourth, it
destroys the whole tradition of theories of ‘interests’ as possessing empirical grounding in political thought.” See his remarks, “The Thirteen Commandments of Neoliberalism” at http://www
.the-utopian.org/post/53360513384/the-thirteen-commandments-of-neoliberalism.
66. The simple formula that the powerful should be transparent and the powerless opaque means
something only if those terms are self-evident and if they sit still while the world turns. Neither is
a reasonable assumption. Consider this example. Solly Benjamin and his colleagues looked at the
impact of the digitization of land records in Bangalore. Their findings were that newly available
access to landownership and title information in Bangalore was primarily being put to use by
middle- and upper-income people and by corporations to gain ownership of land from the marginalized and the poor. The newly digitized and openly accessible data allowed the well-to-do to
take the information provided and use that as the basis for instructions to land surveyors and
lawyers and others to challenge titles, exploit gaps in title, take advantage of mistakes in documentation, and identify opportunities and targets for bribery, among others. They were able to
directly translate their enhanced access to the information along with their already available
access to capital and professional skills into unequal contests around land titles, court actions,
offers of purchase, and so on for self-benefit and to further marginalize those already marginalized. Solomon Benjamin, R. Bhuvaneswari, P. Rajan, and Manjunatha, “Bhoomi: ‘E-Governance,’
or, an Anti-Politics Machine Necessary to Globalize Bangalore?” CASUM-m working paper, January 2007, http://casumm.files.wordpress.com/2008/09/bhoomi-e-governance.pdf.
67. “Virtual People to Get ID Checks,” BBC News, July 29, 2011, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/
technology-14277728.
68. Charles A. Shanor, “Making a Mountain out of a Digital Molehill,” New York Times,
June 7, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/07/opinion/making-a-mountain-out-of-a-digital
-molehill.html.

440

Notes

69. Consider Cloud Inc., “a non-profit working to create a contextual markup language around
identity.” See “Austin Nonprofit Trying to Help the World Get Back Its Online Identity,” Statesman, July 24, 2011, http://www.statesman.com/news/technology/austin-nonprofit-trying-tohelp-the-world-get-back/nRcwY/. Or, Kyle Vanhemert, “For $300, You Can Buy a Stunning 3-D
Printed Version of Yourself,” Wired, August 2, 2013, http://www.wired.com/2013/08/this
-company-will-transform-you-into-an-incredibly-detailed-3-d-printed-figurine/.
70. Andy Greenberg and Ryan Mac, “How a ‘Deviant’ Philosopher Built Palantir, a CIAFunded Data-Mining Juggernaut,” Forbes, August 14, 2013, http://www.forbes.com/sites/
andygreenberg/2013/08/14/agent-of-intelligence-how-a-deviant-philosopher-built-palantir-a-cia
-funded-data-mining-juggernaut/.
71. Hugo De Garis, The Artilect War: Cosmists vs. Terrans: A Bitter Controversy Concerning Whether
Humanity Should Build Godlike Massively Intelligent Machines (Palm Springs, CA: ETC Publications,
2005).
72. Gigi Fenomen, “New App Allows Piloting a Drone with Google Glass Using Head Movements,” Android Apps, August 24, 2013, http://android-apps.com/news/new-app-allows-piloting
-a-drone-with-google-glass-using-head-movements/.
73. Let me propose that Philip K. Dick’s novel A Scanner Darkly (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
1977), should be part of the standard high school literature curriculum, if only because the existential psychology of the User will prove to be based on first-person access to third-person experiences of first-person experiences.
74. Singleton, “On Being Crafty.”
75. Benedict Singleton, “Maximum Jailbreak,” e-flux journal, no. 46 (June 2013).
76. Mark A. McMenamin and Dianna L. Schulte, Hypersea: Life on Land (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1994).
77. Katherine Harmon, “Undead-End: Fungus That Controls Zombie-Ants Has Own Fungal
Stalker,” Scientific American, November 8, 2012, http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/
zombie-ant-fungus-parasite/. The line, “animal living inside of animal living inside animal” is Ed
Keller’s.

The Stack to Come
1. Dave Eggers, The Circle (San Francisco: McSweeney’s, 2013).
2. Writers Against Mass Surveillance, “A Stand for Democracy in the Digital Age,” a collectively
signed petition at https://www.change.org/p/a-stand-for-democracy-in-the-digital-age-3. First
published December 10, 2013.
3. From Chris Anderson’s talk at Google, Authors@Google: Chris Anderson (2012), https://www
.youtube.com/watch?v 3grzYoJ2oPQ.

Notes

441

4. Jacob Appelbaum, “Art as Evidence” (panel at Transmediale, Haus Der Kulturen Der
Welt, Berlin, January 30, 2014), http://www.transmediale.de/content/presentation-by-jacob
-applebaum-at-transmediale-2014-keynote-art-as-evidence.
5. Charles Manson, “Lie,” recorded August 9, 1968, Phil Kaufman, 1970, vinyl recording.
6. A sectional tracking shot, as in Hitchcock’s Rear Window, directed by Alfred Hitchcock (Paramount, 1954). Made in USA, directed by Jean-Luc Godard (Anouchka Films, Rome Paris Films,
S.E.P.I.C, 1966). (Or, for that matter, Shigeru Miyamoto’s video game Donkey Kong.)
7. This line of thinking is represented by John Perry Barlow’s “Declaration of the Independence
of Cyberspace” manifesto from 1996, as well as various anarchist and libertarian platforms. To
states he warned, “You are not welcome among us. You have no sovereignty where we gather.”
To his credit, Barlow’s opinions have evolved considerably since this text was first posted.
8. One of the ways that states hope to manage a transition and translation into Cloud platforms
is to take it on themselves to realize a cartographic and optical authority—omniscience, if you
like—over the entirety of the space they call “cyber.” In September 2014, as part of an ongoing
wave of disclosures, Der Spiegel published a PDF file of a PowerPoint deck, “Bad guys are everywhere, good guys are somewhere,” presented by the NSA/CSS Threat Operations Center, which
included a slide featuring the US security agencies’ own version of The Stack. As said, the US
Department of Defense has Stack theorists too. The diagram is not secret, it has been around a
while, and it depicts what Paul Rosenzweig calls “the five layers of the cyber domain.” This book’s
stack is Earth and Cloud at the physical layer, City and Address at the network layer, and Interface
and User at the application and agent layers. The Department of Defense’s stack has a Geographic
layer, a Physical Network layer, a Logical Network layer, a Cyber Persona layer, and a Persona
layer. The deck also discusses an initiative called Treasuremap, which purports to “map the entire
Internet—Any device, anywhere, all the time.” A whole chapter of this book could have been
devoted just to the US federal Stack programs at work, especially those detailed in similar decks
and perhaps that will be a follow-up in one way or another. Detailed images of the Defense Stack,
and of these programs’ publicly available diagrams and publications, are at the book website,
thestack.org. Another notable usage of “stacks” is by Bruce Sterling, who around the same time as
I was giving public lectures based on this book, made several references to what he called “The
Stacks.” For him this term refers, roughly speaking, to large Cloud platforms such as Google,
Apple and Facebook. He contrasted these systems to an ideal “open internet.” See for example
Sterling’s closing address at the 2012 South By Southwest conference, Austin, Texas. March 13,
2012. And his essay “State of the World 2013” (with Jon Lebkowsky) at http://www.well.com/
conf/inkwell.vue/topics/459/State-of-the-World-2013-Bruce-St-page01.html. Sterling and I have
exchanged notes on the implications of the term, and he has also blogged about this book’s
developing research. See for example, “The Cloud, The State and the Stack” at http://www.wired
.com/2012/12/the-cloud-the-state-and-the-stack/ and “On the Nomos of the Cloud: The Stack,
Deep Address and Political Geography” at http://www.wired.com/2013/02/on-the-nomos-of-the
-cloud-the-stack-deep-address-internal-geography/.
9. “God Bows to Math” is a song by Minutemen, from the album Double Nickels on the Dime (SST
Records, San Pedro, CA, 1984).

442

Notes

10. See “Comparative Planetology: An Interview with Kim Stanley Robinson,” http://bldgblog
.blogspot.com/2007/12/comparative-planetology-interview-with.html.
11. That it is not surprising does not make it any less disappointing, but that famous “blue
marble” photograph that ostensibly gave figural clarity to a globally politicized Ecology movement was taken by astronaut, Harrison Schmitt, later a vociferous climate-change denialist senator from New Mexico. Further, the original version of the photograph showed the continent of
Africa with the tip of the Cape of Good Hope facing “up” and so putting the occluded areas
Europe and the United States “below” Africa in perspective. There is no north or south in space,
but the public versions of the photo inverted this perspective to a north-up map orientation
restoring a completely artificial natural order.
12. On Peter Thiel’s thesis see “Technology Stalled in 1970,” MIT Technology Review, September
18, 2014, http://www.technologyreview.com/qa/530901/technology-stalled-in-1970/.
13. See my “We Need to Talk About TED” editorial published by The Guardian, December 30,
2014, http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/30/we-need-to-talk-about-ted.
14. Mike Davis, “Who Will Build the Ark?” New Left Review, no. 61 (January/February 2010): 45,
http://newleftreview.org/II/61/mike-davis-who-will-build-the-ark: “Tackling the challenge of sustainable urban design for the whole planet, and not just for a few privileged countries or social
groups, requires a vast stage for the imagination, such as the arts and sciences inhabited in the
May Days of Vkhutemas and the Bauhaus. It presupposes a radical willingness to think beyond
the horizon of neo-liberal capitalism toward a global revolution that reintegrates the labour of
the informal working classes, as well as the rural poor, in the sustainable reconstruction of their
built environments and livelihoods.”
15. Martin Heidegger interview with Der Spiegel by Rudolf Augstein and Georg Wolff, September
23, 1966, published May 31, 1976.
16. Latour’s unfortunate and broadly dismissive remarks on geoengineering: Bruno Latour, keynote speech (CAST Symposium: Seeing/Sounding/Sensing, MIT Media Lab, Cambridge, September 26, 2014), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v R7hAP4wG71s.
17. The case for geoengineering is made by David Keith, A Case for Climate Engineering (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013). Nick Srncicek’s review of Keith’s book is at http://review31.co.uk/
article/view/196/prometheanism-and-the-precautionary-principle. On the importance of preemptive international agreements governing if, when, and how geoengineering may be initiated,
see David G. Victor, Global Warming Gridlock: Creating More Effective Strategies for Protecting the
Planet (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011).
18. Speaking of platforms, fossil-fuel-based economies are themselves subordinated by platform
lock-in, in this case, for the extraction and transmutation of particular molecules.
19. By all accounts, Amazon space is already built on the precision of an object flow that engineers the movements of human workers with a repetitious efficiency probably better suited to
robots. In describing the stress and precariousness of work in Amazon fulfillment centers it may

Notes

443

be that less human labor is more humane, but as Amazon (and really all the major Cloud platforms) absorbs, centralizes, and consolidates production labor into tighter strata of proprietary
commerce-logistics algorithms, the future of work is made that much more uncertain, and along
with it, the real economic power of their workers to also be their customer-Users.
20. For example, Ian Berry, “Monsanto to Buy Planting Technology Company,” Wall Street
Journal, May 23, 2012, http://online.wsj.com/articles/SB100014240527023047076045774221621
32896528.
21. Sleep Dealer, directed by Alex Rivera (Vaya Entertainment, 2008).
22. From a private Facebook post by Christopher Head.
23. For example, on the North American Free Trade Agreement, David Graeber writes: “Hardly
surprising: if it were not possible to effectively imprison the majority of people in the world in
impoverished enclaves, there would be no incentive for Nike or The Gap to move production
there to begin with. Given a free movement of people, the whole neoliberal project would collapse. This is another thing to bear in mind when people talk about the decline of ‘sovereignty’ in
the contemporary world: the main achievement of the nation-state in the last century has been
the establishment of a uniform grid of heavily policed barriers across the world. It is precisely this
international system of control that we are fighting against, in the name of genuine globalization.” See Tom Mertes and Walden Bello, Walden, a Movement of Movements: Is Another World
Really Possible? (London: Verso, 2004), 206.
24. A similar conclusion from the other side of the political spectrum, foldling around the point
where left anarchism and right libertarianism carry water for one another. Arnold Kling,
“Exit, Voice, and Freedom: An Example,” Library of Economics and Liberty, August 13, 2009, http://
econlog.econlib.org/archives/2009/08/exit_voice_and_2.html.
25. For a list and typology of enclaves and exclaves, see Jan S. Krogh’s “Geosite: Enclaves and
Exclaves,” http://geosite.jankrogh.com/exclaves.htm.
26. At the same time as the City layer of The Stack integrates individual cities more thoroughly
into a general planetary infrastructure of energy, water, labor, and information, it also might shift
the economics of that common infrastructure from one that is by necessity held in common to
one that becomes, through its use, a revenue platform. Whereas Google generates revenue by
reselling the thoughts, preferences, clicks, and pathways of its users, so might the Google City (of
activated energy, water, and labor, as well as information) generate revenue by the “using” of the
very interfaces that compose and comprise the city in situated space: user-citizen-laborers making
money for a city’s charter investors by the simple arcs of their dérive. The ambient urban interface
is a cash cow for the right cloud urbanist. Such are the geopolitics of the City layer of The Stack.
27. See Elysium, directed by Neill Blomkamp (Sony Pictures Entertainment, 2013). As when
Ukrainians seized the semisecret palace of deposed President Yanukovych, only to discover a
museum of kitsch gold toilet seats, the audience of Elysium could only be disappointed with the
incredible lack of imagination (and taste) exhibited by those who would abscond with the planet’s remaining wealth for their own benefit. That they would use the lives of billions of people for

444

Notes

kindling is one thing; that they would purchase such dull garden-variety bourgeoisie, is the insult
on top of insult. Dictators these days have no taste.
28. J. G. Ballard, High Rise (London: Jonathan Cape, 1975).
29. See
http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/23/history-border-crisis-central
-america-gangs.
30. Recall recent attempts to shut off the water for at least tens of thousands of residents of
Detroit, http://www.cbsnews.com/news/detroit-water-shut-offs-brings-u-n-scrutiny/ http://www
.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-29697767. Martin Lukacs, “Detroit’s Water War: A Tap ShutOff That Could Impact 300,000 People,” Guardian, June 25, 2014, http://www.theguardian.com/
environment/true-north/2014/jun/25/detroits-water-war-a-tap-shut-off-that-could-impact
-300000-people.
31. See http://www.crimethinc.com/texts/ex/digital-utopia.html, https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v cOubCHLXT6A,
and
http://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/public
_statements/promoting-internet-inclusion-more-things-more-people/140107ces-iot.pdf.
32. Balaji Srinivasa, “Silicon Valley’s Ultimate Exit,” speech at the Y Combinator Startup
School, De Anza College, Cupertino, CA, October 25, 2013, https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v cOubCHLXT6A. “Peacefully start an international (1) company, (2) community, (3) currency, (4) country. We are now at step 3.” (@balajis, January 3, 2014.
33. Albert O. Hirschman, Exit, Voice, and Loyalty; Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations, and
States (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1970).
34. Larry Page, “Google I/O 2013: Keynote,” YouTube, May 15, 2013, https://www.youtube
.com/watch?v 9pmPa_KxsAM.
35. Bruce Sterling, Islands in the Net (New York: Arbor House, 1988).
36. Robin Hanson, “More Inequality, Merited,” Overcoming Bias, September 22, 2011, http://
www.overcomingbias.com/2011/09/more-inequality-merited.html.
37. “Beyond this core agenda, the forces of Organized Chaos, by and large, think that the Internet should be allowed to evolve on its own, the way human societies always have. The forces of
Organized Chaos have a pretty good sense of how it will evolve, at least in the short term. The
Internet will stratify, as cities did long ago. There will be the mass Internet we already know—a
teeming bazaar of artists and merchants and thinkers as well as pickpockets and hucksters and
whores. It is a place anyone can enter, anonymously or not, and for free. Travel at your own risk!
But anyone who wishes can decide to leave this bazaar for the security of the bank or the government office—or, if you have enough money, the limousine, the Sky Club, the platinum concierge. You will always have to give something up. If you want utter and absolute privacy, you
will have to pay for it—or know the right people, who will give you access to their hidden darknets. For some services, you may decide to trade your privacy and anonymity for security.
Depending on circumstance and desire, people will range among these worlds.” Michael J.
Gross, “World War 3.0,” Vanity Fair, May 16, 2012, http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2012/05/
internet-regulation-war-sopa-pipa-defcon-hacking.

Notes

445

38. In the mature version of this particular Cloud feudalism scenario (again, it is one among
many such scenarios, not a prediction), the walls of some gardens are hard and thick and resemble those of factories or zoos, while others are informal, invisible, or covered in pixels. The routinization of everyday life for the vast plurality of people reduces User-citizens to mere personnel in
wider interplatform conflicts and dramas. The social and economic relationships between
enclave/camps in a geography of Cloud polities operating at such radically different levels of
power is likely to function like similar arrangements have in the past, through the extraction of
arbitrary rent and the coordination of coercive exposure and autonomous servitude.
On the geopolitical stage, a not dissimilar mix of the new and the old, of consolidation and
division, is played out. On the secular side, it is characterized by an apparently paradoxical
dynamic between the entropic global integration of mobile people, goods, data, currencies,
viruses, and genomes, versus pronounced state securitization, as well as nativist or irredentist
claims against the effects, both real and imagined, of that mobility. The tension between geographic integration and disintegration emerges from an interdependent spatial-cultural economy
in which the conditions of movement and the risks of interpenetration are mediated by the subdividing envelopes of interfacial provincialism and urban regionalism. Contemporary geopolitics
depends on this tension just as much as the attacks on it from both the future front and archaic
rear exploit it by elevating it to messianic first principle. Globalization results less on the disappearance of borders than in their perforated multiplication and superimposition, and in the proliferation of enclaves and exclaves bending around each other’s only-partial interior space. In
this, the conditions of exclusive or partial membership of any Cloud Polis is determined not only
by its technological services on offer but also by the more complex sociocultural, even theological, demands of those multiple interiors. That any User may occupy several, even at once, complicates how they are and are not mobilized by any one of these. This patchwork may generate new
geopolitical belief systems, or make use of older ones, or combine them. Imagined communities
might precede their migration to the Cloud (by several centuries in the case of religious or ethnic
nationalisms) where they can reanimate and rearticulate older cosmologies and geographies. The
appearance of new variations might be a novel function of the Cloud’s most recent social moral
communities to which they are native (such as Anonymous).
In practice, as for any transnational cultural sphere, the imagined communities that fill out
any Cloud Polis with social content will draw on both an existing archive of cultural identities
and tensions as well as employ novel logics of the Cloud to innovate on their conceptual alliances
and practices of inclusion and exclusion. As we’ve explored, the fragility of such translations
between the message and the medium includes ambiguities as to what is and is not a state or
“market” endeavor in the first place, sacred or profane, inside and outside, here and there. At
present, with that fragility at hand and those ambiguities in our hearts and mind, perhaps among
the most urgent next steps for geodesign is to draw preemptive scenarios of their implications
and work backward from them.
39. There is unlikely potential in other examples at a different scale as well. We have the curious
cases of religious movements becoming parastates, such as the Vatican, or ISIS, or Hezbollah, the
transnational Shi’a party, and military and social service apparatus based in Lebanon. Suspending
from our minds only for a moment the ideological content of this entity, what in reality is the
sovereign status of this organizational form? It is a state within a state, albeit one largely financed

446

Notes

by another state, that has not seceded from its host nation but controls large swaths with lastinstance sovereignty. On purely formal terms, how would organizational apparatuses such as
these compare to corporations that have, at least in the United States, been granted the constitutional protections of private religious belief? (Here market fundamentalism collaborates directly
in desecularization.) We can easily imagine scenarios in which theologically programmatic Cloud
platforms might compose their City, Address, Interface, and User layers as something that resembles Hezbollah at least as much as a mid-twentieth-century corporation.
40. It is clearly not the annulment of dissensus, because in the absence of real politicization of
fundamental conflict and the proliferation of incompatible and often unredeemable cosmographies, the only positions of dissent end up being those of the irredentist, the humanist, and the
fundamentalist. That is an unsustainable trinity.
41. Behold the Schengen Cloud, New Arizona, Transcalifornia, Hong Kong West, the AlibabaTesla Printing and Charging Station franchise network, NTT-DoKoMo Planet Tokyo retirement
towers and robo-spa, Google Continent Cloud, Tata-IIT-Khan Academy primary schools, the
Confederate States of Walmart, RadTransFem GMOrganic Foods and Soil Stewardship (based in
Fresno), the Apple-Pixar-Genentech Alliance, and so on.
42. Consider once more Estonia’s program to extend “e-citizenship” to those who do not physically reside inside its land borders. See https://e-estonia.com/e-residents/about/.
43. The anarchist-artist dream of autonomous secession by sabotage, refusal, anonymity, and
delinking is part of the problem. Localism (individual or communitarian) means inside these
sturdy walls. A political philosophy inordinately nervous about the ambiguities of transaction
externalities will have to build increasingly more elaborate justifications. The simplest is to
simply wall off the external altogether so that it cannot intrude, interfere, or enforce a division
of labor.
44. See the full RFC at http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc761.
45. The reversibility of the line, between inside and outside, exit and entrance to or from what,
tracks the reversibility of utopia and dystopia. The utopian perfect island may be projected into
the present for the totalitarian, into the fundamentalist’s past, or into the modernist’s future. The
dystopian is sometimes the aberration that merely smudges the utopian absolute, ruptured from
the inside by the revenge-seeking tabula that was not so rasa after all. At other times, as in many
Philip K. Dick fictions, the dystopian is more like the nightmare that turns out to be an dream of
unforeseen redemption or unforeseeable enlightenment. As the utopias and their reversals
(which may be dystopian, or perhaps not) begin to pile up and reflect onto the diagonal surfaces
of one another, insides and outsides multiply, and the exit and entrance dynamics becomes less
intelligible as the borderlines intersect in volumetric space. Those lines seem to reverberate and
blur, doing double duty to hold something in and out, but as we will see, these may not be
imprecise traces of something definite; rather they are also meticulous representations of something ambiguous.
Further, the reversibility of the line can help design or make its job impossible. Every new
historical phase of information technology seemed to bring a promise of universalism, or of at

Notes

447

least of an integration of global community and communication. At the same time, perhaps
every “imagined community” congeals through its particular ways of reading and being read by
media technologies unevenly arranged across the world. Any universality that does arrive may be
that societies are subdivided from one another according to the same means, and so share this
cycle of consolidation and forking, both real and imagined. Any line drawn with purpose pushes
and pulls against this, knowingly or unknowingly, partitioning and framing its additions on an
always rotating plane. Any project of metadesign is then faced with some crisis of confidence. As
it becomes technically easier to draw a line, it is that much harder to know whether that line is
linking or delinking, gathering something in or fencing something out. Because of this, not
despite it, the right of design has to be equal to that of voice in the automanagement of those
societies subdivided from one another as they share the common limitations of mutual intersection. It also means that the basic social problematics of cohabitation remain.
As discussed in the City layer chapter, we lack an adequate legal and political understanding of
the “refugee” as a generic position, as opposed to an exceptional situation. It is always not
enough to say that we cannot solve a refugee problem by producing a new refugee problem
because, for better or worse, the identity that anyone and everyone shares of the stateless person
dislodged from her home is the identity that each of us navigates when the shadow of some
other utopia or dystopia sweeps over us in which we have no role to play. That namelessness
and uselessness can also be another name for statelessness. Given the contemporary mania for
revanchism, based on claims of primordial occupation going back centuries or even millennia, it
is worth asking once again if the values we place in the notion of home and homeland are more
dangerous than whatever comfort of continuity they may promise. This would be a good starting
point to designing cohabitation. It does not answer for us how to solve the puzzle of inclusion,
always based on exclusion as a shared condition, or even if solving that is the point. It does point
us away from conventional discussions of the legal unipolarity of a single regime of “rights” for
citizens and noncitizens and toward another one about partial citizens, temporary citizens, dual-,
triple-, and quad-citizenships, or away from this legal position altogether perhaps. It is complex
enough to map stateless persons. It is perhaps more so to make room for personless states, or for
corporations of multiple persons that are afforded religious and speech metarights above and
beyond those of the humans that they aggregate. Swatting at flying robots all day and night can’t
possibly keep the natural order in place.
On the contrary, the normalized exception, inverting interior and exterior also inverts the
utopian and dystopian projects, even across the same interfacial hinge of the subdividing wall.
The oscillation of the enclave and the camp may work variously as the cause or the effect of the
proliferation of our overlapping surplus of utopias, absorbing design programs into its demands
and spinning out the accidents of political subjectivity that characterize the City layer of The
Stack. What is clear is that in this overlap, as each of us is, at every given moment, inside some
Cloud polities that actively recognize us as Users or citizens, outside of others that may or may
not, and inside others that do not recognize us, even as we move around geographies in what it
may imagine to be their jurisdictions, that our continuous transactions with the physical and
virtual envelopes of our habitats never resolve into any absolute political space that can make
last-instance claims on whatever or whoever is passing through. No one addressing scheme
can finally exclude others. Accordingly the plans and programs of the designers of that space,

448

Notes

regardless of their own valorizations of an absolute architecture, have even less durable authority
on those claims and those identities. The site is itself a microcosmic platform but only even in
relation to others, at the same or different scale. As the borders cross you, you must be able to
come as well as go. The interfaces that cohere the site as a surface of interest are only ever interfaces to or from another site, and if for no other reason than this, the platform geopolitics of the
User must design entrance to be as dominant a function as exit.
46. “Marxists will likely find that life in our centrally-managed military compound is
incompatible with their ideology.” Eric Lach, “‘Liberty-Driven’ Fortress Community Being
Planned in Idaho,” TPM, January 14, 2013, http://livewire.talkingpointsmemo.com/entry/
liberty-driven-fortress-community-being-planned-in-idaho.
47. Roger O. Friedland, “Money, Sex and God: The Erotic Logics of Religious Nationalism,” Sociological Theory 20 (2002): 381–425.
48. Robert MacBride, The Automated State: Computer Systems as a New Force in Society (Philadelphia: Chilton Book, 1967); Stanislaw Lem, Summa Technologica (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2013; originally published 1964); and Thomas Wells, “The Robot Economy
and the Crisis of Capitalism: Why We Need Universal Basic Income,” ABC Religion and Ethics
(Australian Broadcasting Corporation), July 17, 2014, http://www.abc.net.au/religion/
articles/2014/07/17/4048180.htm.
49. Srnicek and Williams’ book Inventing the Future would hold one end of this spectrum, while
Evgeny Morozov’s “The Planning Machine” would fix the other. See http://www.newyorker.com/
magazine/2014/10/13/planning-machine.
50. McKenzie Wark, Molecular Red: Theory for the Anthropocene (London: Verso, 2015); Benedict
Singleton, “Maximum Jailbreak,” e-flux, July 27, 2013, http://www.e-flux.com/journal/
maximum-jailbreak/.
51. Friedrich A. von Hayek, Law, Legislation, and Liberty: A New Statement of the Liberal Principles of
Justice and Political Economy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976), 2:107–132.
52. “If Wal-Mart instituted, say, a zero-tolerance policy against developing-world factories abusing their workforces, and simultaneously brought in a regime of unannounced factory inspections combined with anonymous, off-site interviews with workers, it would probably do more to
change the working conditions in Third World sweatshops than any government on the planet.
That, though, is the problem. Wal-Mart stretches far beyond the reach of any government.” John
Lanchester, “The Price of Pickles,” London Review of Books, June 22, 2006, 3–6, http://www.lrb
.co.uk/v28/n12/john-lanchester/the-price-of-pickles.
53. Walmart’s customers, demographic analysis may suggest, do not have the same degree of
access to e-commerce infrastructure, from home PCs to broadband service. Still, the current discrepancy of total revenue between Amazon (about $50 billion a year) and Walmart (about $450
billion) suggests any major shift is still to come.
54. That chagrin comes through in financial press articles such as these, http://www.fool.com/
investing/general/2015/02/04/amazon-just-admitted-that-its-losing-billions.aspx.

Notes

449

55. Amazon is not a model of “fully automated luxury communism” but it is a model of something that may in turn be one of its ancestors.
56. As we will discuss in greater detail below, the geodesign potential of algorithmic governance,
in the rawest sense, is hamstrung by the negative disposition that some hold regarding the politics of quantitative representation, statistics, and even mathematics itself. This is both a reaction
to the considerable violence that calculative reason wrought during twentieth-century wars, as
well as the result of a self-validating antimodernism that ensued and has become, in turn, the
basis of a sometimes reactionary posture that in various mixtures and guises draws on noble and
ignoble traditions. Moral vigilance against “instrumental reason” easily slides into anti-intellectualism. Some activists may bomb the Army Research Center for Mathematics and believe it to be a
morally defensible part of an antiwar strategy, as they support and are supported by the conclusion that mathematics and war are inextricable ways of knowing. Others see our Anthropocenic
precocity as the unprecedented metaexternality of modernity itself and conclude that only a dismantling, reversal, or downscaling of ambition and its equipment, especially computing
machines, can limn the path away from apocalypse and toward their preferred salvation. These
perspectives are not only assailable, they are variously inadequate, immature, and sociopathic.
The importance of truly confronting the inarticulability of the Anthropocene, is unfortunately
obscured not only by our own cowardice, but also by the enchanted nihilism of our worst angels.
Back in the city, people may assault other people wearing Google Glass on behalf of evicted
renters, imagining their acts as those of popular refusal and resistance to the tyranny of calculative vision. Others draw embarrassing dichotomies between “poetry” and “finance” as the key to
unlocking a new society. However, others provide durable critiques of how the algorithmic geopolitics is currently configured, and how its dangerous naturalization by market fundamentalism
is not only legible in certain philosophical trends but naturalized by them. Others have accomplished a powerful politics of open, reprogrammable computational infrastructures that has had a
direct and positive on how global systems are developed, though not nearly enough, and battles
won may be reversed. Still others have articulated, from the disciplinary margins, a visionary and
proactive leftist futurism that makes a native comfort with techniques of comprehensive abstraction a central tenet of post-neoliberal economics. Lest the zealotry of negative retreat and resistance is to define the leftist geopolitics of planetary-scale computation, it is essential that the
legacies of progressive futurism, democratic welfare and pleasure, and infrastructural transnationalism are able to resolve their crises of courage and self-legitimacy and to find themselves willing
and able to design and enforce the platforms we all require.
57. I find the use of the term communism to describe these kinds of transformations in the marginal costs of commodity provisions needlessly old-fashioned. “A new cybernetic communism,
itself one of these options, would, we have seen, involve some of the following elements: use of
the most advanced super-computing to algorithmically calculate labour time and resource
requirements, at global, regional and local levels, of multiple possible paths of human development; selection from these paths by layered democratic discussion conducted across assemblies
that include socialized digital networks and swarms of software agents; light-speed updating and
constant revision of the selected plans by streams of big data from production and consumption
sources; the passage of increasing numbers of goods and services into the realm of the free or of

450

Notes

direct production as use values once automation, copy-left, peer-to-peer commons and other
forms of micro-replication take hold; the informing of the entire process by parameters set from
the simulations, sensors, and satellite systems measuring and monitoring the species metabolic
interchange with the planetary environment.” Nick Dyer-Witheford, “Red Plenty Platforms,”
Culture Machines, July 28, 2013, http://www.culturemachine.net/index.php/cm/article/view/
511/526.
58. As well as a partial corrective, perhaps, to Adam Curtis’s tendentious narrative All Watched
Over by Machines of Loving Grace (BBC Productions, 2011).
59. This is drawn on our white board as a syncretic thought experiment because of, not in spite
of, the complexities and contradictions it makes visible. Among the two most salient are, first,
that no actual platform ever functions in an ideal manner and so simply transposing state or
corporate governance into platforms does not guarantee specific outcomes, and, second, that the
data with which any platform might govern do not merely exist in the world to be gathered and
then presented to political systems for their application; rather the identification, sensing, sorting, application, revelation, and instrumentalization of data is the political system in this context. Its distortions are not errors; they are, as for any other intelligence, a function of what any
platform can and cannot see. The provisional typology of platforms listed in the first chapter
should be applied as both generic description and functional ideal: the setting of stages, by rigorous morphological standardization, toward forms of entrenchment that are desirable, allowing
for unexpected reprogrammability, according to intelligent formal models, adding genuine value
for Users, from a position that is neither exactly central nor distributed, that modulates the generation of governable identities, according to denuded diagrams, in which all components can be
replaced, governing instantaneously and cumulatively, with incentivized error correction, by
organizing existing systems, that can withstand the vulnerabilities that come with ubiquity, that
demonetize (or monetize absolutely, which may be the same thing), that inform Users of their
architecture in ways that support narrative participation as much as infrastructural transparency,
that coordinate with the parallel ubiquity of other total platforms, and which therefore spin out
system-scale accidents that are net positive, and so on, and so on. These are not givens; they are
guidelines, both descriptive and prescriptive. To this list I highlight the right of exit and entrance
from platform totalities. It’s true that successful and sustainable platforms may not only be
“walled gardens,” but will enforce that wall with serious punishment, but our geodesign program
stipulates that orderly User promiscuity between platforms is how the totality of totalities would
work best as an active search field for optimal Anthropocenic (or post-Anthropocenic) planetary
urbanism.
60. Gabriel De Tarde and Theo Lorenc, Monadology and Sociology (Prahran, Victoria: Re.press,
2011), 167–168.
61. It would also expand the governability of the information into depths and domains previously impossible. The fully posthuman descendant of The Stack we have may compose communicative flows in ways that our unique perch, measured in meters and months, will have far less
privilege of place. But just as indicated for any big data apparatus, any such governance of
addresses, especially those in the near term, would not cohere around what they find out there

Notes

451

but around what they are looking for. The Borges Chinese Encyclopedia problem does not disappear with supercomputing or 1023 addresses; rather, it expands exponentially. Any two governing
apparatuses are able to map the same planet and what happens on it according to the categorical
logics of utterly different kinds of descriptive systems, both of which are equally valid from the
rigorously agnostic view of the addresses themselves. For example, the ontologies of, say, midtwenty-first-century organic chemistry as informed by electron microscopes as well as certain
medieval spoken dialects mixing Russian and Polish languages may both be able to decide that
certain things are in fact “things” requiring a number or not, while others don’t register at all,
physically or conceptually, and may do so according to their own limited scopes.
62. See Stuart Elden, The Birth of Territory (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013).
63. The Security and Exchange Commission’s 2005 Regulation National Market System (Reg
NMS), which required that traders execute trades at the “best price for their clients,” of which an
unintended consequence was the rise of “dark pools” that incentivize large traders to build
market simulations to make trades against. See http://online.wsj.com/articles/SB1000142405270
2304886904579475584095555384; Michael Lewis, Flash Boys: A Wall Street Revolt (New York:
Norton, 2014); and US Securities and Exchange Commission, Division of Market Regulation,
Regulation National Market System (Washington, DC, 2005).
64. Paul Krugman, “Bits and Barbarism,” New York Times, December 22, 2013, http://www
.nytimes.com/2013/12/23/opinion/krugman-bits-and-barbarism.html.
65. Once more, a different connotation for the word “hyperobject” than Timothy Morton’s.
66. Niklas Luhmann, Dirk Baecker, and Peter Gilgen, Introduction to Systems Theory (Cambridge:
Polity Press, 2012).
67. It does so by representing the full scale of planetary systems and in doing so suggests some
authority over them. As seen most explicitly in computational megaprojects such as Planetary
Skin, the ascendance of data visualization as a governing visual rhetoric allows for, if not also
demands, the pictorial coherence of worldly systems otherwise dedifferentiated. As GUI come to
take on more of the look and utility of data visualization (the image-instrument diagram discussed in the Interface chapter), the same tilt toward not just comprehensive images but also total
images and image-instruments. In other words, interfacial regimes make claims on the always
reconfigurable geoscapes that frame the social, economic, or religious significance of any chain of
interaction, and which by repetition comes to physically enforce that regime in the world. The
symptomatic interest in reflecting a master diagram onto the world as if its mimetic regularity
were interchangeable with the regulation of that world not only persists but is amplified by the
affordances of planetary computation. The instrumentalized “world picture” functions not only
as a projective image of a claim into the geoscape, as any utopian image does; it channels the
utopian program of that projection not only into the abstract futurity of an image of a world in
the future but also as a literal technology for the management of that future today. It renders its
utopia less by the implied resolution of a meta-history than as meta-interfaciality.
68. This is perhaps a kind of reverse skeuomorphism. They automate consent, like automating a
decision by building it into an interface.

452

Notes

69. Planetary-scale computation is both the medium through which the possibility of comprehensive planetary visualization (however skewed) is possible and something to be represented
within that geography and its motivated geoscapes. The Interface layer is where the performance
of any exceptional reversal between inside and outside plays out, even if it is for the benefit of
just one User’s line of sight. It is also, as discussed regarding the City layer, where any one interface, physical or virtual, may open or close urban habitats to some Users and foreclose them to
others, automating the normalization of that inversion of exceptional internalization and externalization on the fly. Depending on the regime at work, the results for any given User may be
very different, however resolved or however alien they appear to different Users all sorted by
platform cognition into their microcultures. Things show up on your map that are not on mine,
and vice versa, and that is precisely the point. While this may undermine the simple geometry of
cosmopolitan consensus, it may also provide for less timid forms of universalism.
70. For modern panoptic systems, surveillant sensors are hidden or camouflaged from the view
of the surveilled. The gaze is present but unseen. But the contemporary moment is characterized
instead by the display of surveillance and the spectacle of transparency.
71. In practice the interrelationship between scales, both as real accumulations and as diagrammatic images of those accumulations, is a densely intermingled pattern of infra- and intrasignification. The interfacial image represents an interfacial assemblage, but it can also represent a
network, a territory, or a geoscape. For example, a hand-held mapping application may construct
a framed image of very local interfacial objects and surfaces or the larger-scale networks at work
and the territories that structure them. The Citysense app, for example, as an interface to the
urban field draws an image of particular networks among others as they congeal onto particular
nodal interfaces within the city among others, but the image is of the coagulation more than of a
given interface within it. It also locates that network onto the schematic territory of the city here
rendered only as a field of channels for the potential formation of networks. In this, the interface
not only accumulates into networks and networks into territories; here the interface directly diagrams the network in formation and the territory as its limit. We can expect any recursivity then
to be between a decision to be subjectivity located within a field of urban interfaciality based on
a sense of coordination with a network (“my people go there, so I should too”) and even the
positive effects an action might have on the network accumulation itself and its socialized image
(“if I go there, it will show up on the map of my network”).
72. See Tim O’Reilly, “Open Data and Algorithmic Regulation,” Beyond Transparency,
http://beyondtransparency.org/chapters/part-5/open-data-and-algorithmic-regulation/, and Tim
McCormick, “A Brief Exchange with Tim O’Reilly about Algorithmic Regulation,” February 15,
2014. http://tjm.org/2014/02/15/a-brief-exchange-with-tim-oreilly-about-algorithmic-regulation/.
See as well this from O’Reilly: “Consider, for a moment, regulation in a broader context. Your
car’s electronics regulate the fuel-air mix in the engine to find an optimal balance of fuel efficiency and minimal emissions. An airplane’s autopilot regulates the countless factors required to
keep that plane aloft and heading in the right direction. Credit card companies monitor and regulate charges to detect fraud and keep you under your credit limit. Doctors regulate the dosage of
the medicine they give us, sometimes loosely, sometimes with exquisite care, as with the chemotherapy required to kill cancer cells while keeping normal cells alive, or with the anesthesia that

Notes

453

keeps us unconscious during surgery while keeping vital processes going. ISPs and corporate mail
systems regulate the mail that reaches us, filtering out spam and malware to the best of their
ability. Search engines regulate the results and advertisements they serve up to us, doing their
best to give us more of what we want to see.” Tim O’Reilly, “Open Data and Algorithmic Regulation,” in Brett Goldstein and Lauren Dyson, eds., Beyond Transparency (San Francisco: Code
for America Press, 2013), and http://beyondtransparency.org/chapters/part-5/open-data-and
-algorithmic-regulation/.
73. O’Reilly, “Profile of Tim O’Reilly.”
74. Evgeny Morozov, “The Meme Hustler,” Baffler 66 (2013), http://www.thebaffler.com/
articles/the-meme-hustler.
75. Among the core design problems for algorithmic governance is the modulation of that symmetry and asymmetry: between “server side” and “client side,” authority and autonomy, between
upstream and downstream decisions, between Users informing algorithms and algorithms governing with the force of law, or perhaps just “nudging” Users toward ostensibly desirable outcomes. That is, where it may be news to conventional political science that planetary-scale
computation is not only something to govern but where and how governance occurs, it may be
equally surprising to others that software is not only how to govern but that it itself needs to be
governed, and that the cultural conventions of early twenty-first century North American programming culture cannot be transposed onto all systems without difficult mutual translation and
even violent (if necessary) counterdistortions. (As “design outcomes” algorithmic governance
and governance of algorithms should be tightly paired.) Historical precedent strongly suggests
that asymmetries of knowledge and power between governor or and governed (in either direction) may have disastrous consequences. Contemporary concerns over User privacy in relation to
state surveillance and platform dataveillance have led to considerable outcry, some very legitimate and some not. The contravention of surveillance (looking “down” onto the governed) with
sousveillance (looking “up” at the governor) has become the conventional point of distinction for
modulating transparency versus opacity, and, by extension, designing the geopolitics of the User.
The problem in practice (as well as in theory) is that this distinction relies on notions of who or
what is “up” and “down” in relation to whom and to what that are at best highly debatable. This
is so even among the privacy advocacy communities who have come to agree on “outcomes”
even if the reasons for these are incompatible. For some, large central governing systems must
always by definition operate in complete transparency lest they become totalitarian and end
Users must always by definition retain rights to complete opacity for the same reason. For others,
a phobia regarding public scrutiny is hardly the point, and there is strong motivation to shine the
bright light on some “Users” such as wealthy tax evaders for the benefit of large public governance. Others advocate for maximum societal transparency as a self-correcting good, such as
David Brin, while others advocate for maximum opacity and privacy for parallel or opposite
goals, such as some cyptoanarchists. One pernicious result is that everyone believes himself to be
working from a position of disadvantage and self-defense, and so assumes for himself a limitless
license for social violence.
This up-versus-down heuristic will prove to be a far limited model for scaling the complex
geopolitical design questions at hand now and in the future. It is born of a presumption that

454

Notes

governance is synonymous with states that contain human being citizens, that governments are
centralized and distant, but “re-present” the will of those citizens, that any space not occupied by
government sovereignty is instead the domain of “the market,” which has diametrically opposed
priorities for the essential (and inaccurate) vision of center versus periphery that underlies parliamentarian and bureaucratic conceptions of how and where political authority operates, and so
which can only vaguely discern how platforms may constitute a very different kind of political
geography. As discussed in the City layer chapter, Cloud platforms push what used to be command-and-control infrastructural capabilities to the edges of the network, imbuing humble
objects and interfaces with supercomputing capacity, with the Cloud interface device called the
“mobile phone” being the plainest example, and in doing so, the Cloud absorbs and centralizes
other platform regulation duties. In doing so, the object of governance is not just humans but
things as well, including and especially the interfaces between humans and things. Who or what
is or is not transparent in the first place is not the same for people and objects, and yet both can
be Users of one another. As we will see, the geopolitics of the Cloud and composition of the User
as a political subject may bring a kind of trauma, as the emergence of an algorithmic governance
that is not primarily a governance of humans but also of ecologies, inanimate objects, data sets,
other algorithms, of sensing and sensation. This is complicated by the fact that we are not designing one algorithmic-interfacial regime but multiple simultaneous and interweaving totalities.
“Desired outcomes” may overlap but vary widely. What is legal and consistent for one may be
technically or morally impossible for another. That heterogeneity may be another bulwark
against totalitarianism, and it may also be a path toward another as yet undefined universal
materialism, one that is no more or less totalitarian than the laws of mathematics.
76. Bruce Clarke and Mark B. N. Hansen, Emergence and Embodiment: New Essays on Second-Order
Systems Theory (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2009).
77. Peter Watts, Beyond the Rift (San Francisco: Tachyon Publications, 2013), 9.
78. James Bridle, “Do You Know This Person?” Render Search, http://render-search.com/.
79. Sarah Jaffe, “Silicon Valley’s Gig Economy Is Not the Future of Work—It’s Driving Down
Wages,” Guardian, July 23, 2014, http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/23/
gig-economy-silicon-valley-taskrabbit-workers.
80. When I was a youngster, my dislike for the Canadian rock band Rush was confirmed by the
song “Red Barchetta,” about a guy who drives around in his muscle car in defiance of climate and
pollution laws. Today, Johnny Dronehunter protects normatively masculine white guys from the
emasculating influence of “drones” (and “technology” in general we assume) by zooming around
inside his big metal box and shooting at things in the sky. Behold: “Johnny Dronehunter:
Defender of Privacy—Official Trailer Feat,” Salvo 12 Shotgun Silencer, SilencerCo, 2014. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v jIXwQVFt8Ho.
81. The same Johnny Dronehunter: the bitter cyborg in a big heavy car, sitting down with his
knees touching, his little eyes shielded, not only by a massive windshield, but also reflective
lenses strapped to the front of this skull and covering his orbital sockets.

Notes

455

82. Drew Harwell, “‘Human Props Stay in Luxury Homes But Live like Ghosts,” Tampa Bay Times,
July 6, 2014, http://www.tampabay.com/news/business/realestate/human-props-stay-in-luxury
-homes-but-live-like-ghosts/2187417.
83. Cory Doctorow, “The Coming Civil War over General-Purpose Computing” (lecture at Talks
at Google, Google, Mountain View, CA, August 22, 2012), https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v gbYXBJOFgeI.
84. Ryan Calo’s work is instructive on these and related issues. See his “Robotics and the Lessons
of Cyberlaw,” California Law Review 103 (2015), University of Washington School of Law Research
Paper No. 2014-08, February 28, 2014.

The Black Stack
1. By contrast see Giorgio Agamben, The Coming Community (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1993).
2. Paul Virilio, The Futurism of the Instant: Stop-Eject (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2010). Liis
Kängsepp, “Estonia to Offer ‘E-Residency’ to Foreigners,” Wall Street Journal, October 21, 2014,
http://www.wsj.com/articles/estonia-to-offer-e-residency-to-foreigners-1413897698. Sleep Dealer,
directed by Alex Rivera (Vaya Entertainment, 2008). L. Jordan, Dress to Kill (Vision Video, 1980).
3. “Cunning use of flags” is a line by comedian Eddie Izzard, describing British colonial strategy.
4. For example, Gaza and the West Bank are to live in different time zones. Maan News Agency,
August 28, 2011, http://www.maannews.net/eng/viewdetails.aspx?id 416597.
5. O. Wainwright, “The World’s First Indoor City: A Greatest Hits Mashup of London and New
York,” The Guardian, July 9, 2014, http://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture
-design-blog/2014/jul/09/worlds-first-indoor-city-dubai-mall-of-the-world.
6. “Biosphere 2 was a giant sealed world. Eight humans were locked in with a mass of flora and
other fauna, and a balanced ecosystem was supposed to naturally emerge. But from the start it
was completely unbalanced. The CO2 levels started soaring, so the experimenters desperately
planted more green plants, but the CO2 continued to rise, then dissolved in the ‘ocean’ and ate
their precious coral reef. Millions of tiny mites attacked the vegetables and there was less and less
food to eat. The men lost 18% of their body weight. Then millions of cockroaches took over. The
moment the lights were turned out in the kitchen, hordes of roaches covered every surface. And
it got worse—the oxygen in the world started to disappear and no one knew where it was going.
The ‘bionauts’ began to suffocate. And they began to hate one another—furious rows erupted
that often ended with them spitting in one another’s faces. A psychiatrist was brought in to see if
they had gone insane, but concluded simply that it was a struggle for power. Then millions of
ants appeared from nowhere and waged war on the cockroaches. In 1993 the experiment collapsed in chaos and hatred.” A. Curtis, “How the ‘Ecosystem’ Myth Has Been Used for Sinister
Means,” The Guardian, May 28, 2011. See http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/
may/29/adam-curtis-ecosystems-tansley-smuts.

456

Notes

7. Even though the UN’s 1967 Outer Space Treaty stated that no country could claim the
moon, Dennis Hope sold pieces of it anyway. Hope is the owner of the “Lunar Embassy
Corporation” and has sold plots of moon land to 3.7 million people since 1980. The Nevada
entrepreneur believed that he could claim the moon under the guise of a galactic government
that he created. This government would technically be exempt from the UN’s treaty. Unfortunately for Hope and the other lunar loonies, the UN treaty also exempts private citizens of
terrestrial governments from claiming stake in the moon. Victoria Jaggard, “Who Owns the
Moon? The Galactic Government vs the UN,” National Geographic, July 17, 2009, http://
news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2009/07/090717-who-owns-moon-real-estate.html. United
Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs, “Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in
the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies,” January 1967, http://www.unoosa.org/oosa/SpaceLaw/outerspt.html.
8. McKenzie Wark, Molecular Red: Theory for the Anthropocene (London: Verso, 2015); Kim Stanley
Robinson, Red Mars (New York: Bantam Books; 1993); Kim Stanley Robinson, Green Mars (New
York: Bantam Books, 1994); Kim Stanley Robinson, Blue Mars (New York: Bantam Books, 1996).
9. Arjun Appadurai, “Sovereignty without Territoriality: Notes for a Postnational Geography,” in
Geography of Identity, ed. Patricia Yaeger (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996), 40–58.
10. Geodesign is hampered, however, not only by the complexity of its brief but also by the traditions of humanist politics across the spectrum. Moreover, many, if not most, of these traditions
are, on more rigorous examination, less about politics than matters of faith and cultural identity,
symptomatic responses that may incur catastrophe by their intransigence. Historian of science,
Naomi Oreskes, often makes the point about climate change denial that the strength of belief (or
disbelief) often has little to do with a conviction about the state of the science, or even necessarily the state of what the science describes. It stems rather from a distrust or fear of the policies
that seem most relevant to mitigate against it, especially big, coordinated, infrastructure-level
transnational governance. For a rightist libertarian at home on the range in his mind, nothing
could be more unwelcome, and so competing conspiracy theories take the place of thinking and
knowing. Oreskes, however, makes another point, which is that the longer that decisive action
on climate change is delayed, the more draconian and even totalitarian would be any necessary
measures to keep civilization afloat. A pinch of governance now saves a pound later, and so the
filibustering inaction actually does more to guarantee the arrival of what the right (supposedly)
fears most.
Responses like this are by no means confined to the right. Now that The Stack has emerged as
a globally hegemonic system, we see on the left an unfortunate knee-jerk antidigital technology
politics. When “the Internet” was seen as a way to decentralize and distribute power horizontally,
disintermediating older institutions, then a “net politics” for the multitude was essential, but
now that it is seen instead as an architecture for the consolidation and instrumentalization of
power in volumetric space, then the Left falls into familiar stances well suited to critique but not
to design or to the possession of power. Some discourses have trouble keeping straight whether
the chief critique is “client side” (that neoliberalism foists all governing responsibility onto atomized individuals who cannot possibly decide on systemic problems) or “server side” (that massive

Notes

457

state-scale platforms control systems-scale governance, leaving individuals no ability to maneuver autonomously). It is true that in theory, both can be true at the same time, but perhaps
another reason for the contradiction is to protect another paradoxical double-wish: the romance
of left libertarianism, blending old New Left self-realization with in-pocket supercomputing, and
trying to find its footing on ground now given way into the sinkhole of state Keynesianism and
its various variations. The latter used to underwrite the former’s sense of autonomy, but now the
former has helped to decapitate the latter. It should be clear that the interests of the strong
geodesign articulated by this book in the interests of a better Stack-to-come are not to be found
inside the cultural politics of this First World psychodrama. A late-industrial-era aesthetics of
hand tools, grooming, and food (particularly of the white working class) may represent a new
pastoral for some urban youth cultures, but a generational fetishization of analog machines does
not make for a good theory of technology. And yet it sometimes seems as if that, plus a 4Chan-ofeverything, is where things stand. The end result of this dreary convergence of the artisanal optout with misanthropic populism is that many of the worst Cloud feudal outcomes are far more
likely to emerge than they would be if that collective intelligence were guided by another more
future-forward cultural politics. Just as for the Right denialists, the Left counterparts sometimes
work as if their strongest loyalties are to the protection of their own worst fears.
11. The design program suggested doesn’t only pay attention to what is right in front of its nose,
but works with strategic appreciation for incorporation and recursion between scales, which
range from the geo-graphic staging of planetarity to the molecular granularity of deep address,
and in between. This too is a logic of Stacks. As for governance, what binds it to software is its
dual situation “before the law.” It both precedes the law and is subject to the law. It is both how
the state organizes the legal possibilities of connection through the ordination of worldly interfaces and how our legal entanglement with the interfaciality of planetary computation allows it
in turn to take on the roles of governance. Perhaps it is true that the killer application of the
Internet of Things was “insurance.” At first blush, this sounds both boring and scary, but I think
there is a lot to this (though not in ways that O’Reilly is necessarily speaking to). Some critics
jumped on this remark as proof that Californians are digital fascists after all. I think, however,
that after bitcoin and digital money, another area to redesign may in fact be the pooled and
priced risk as a future model of governmentality, as understood in the disciplinary Foucauldian
sense and meant thereby as a good thing. After Mauss (and Graeber), we believe that money represents “gift” and “debt” but it also represents risk, and this may be equally important. I floated the
notion above that Google-scale platforms might be able to solve both the “socialist pricing problem” as well the “capitalist pricing problem,” namely, transaction externalities (e.g., carbon footprint, infrastructure theft, energy theft, pollution), by including these real costs in to the real
price. That price might not only be price of an individual transaction but the price of the insurance and reinsurance that allows the enterprise to function in the first place. That is, insurance as
killer app of Internet of Things gets interesting if those “things” are not just smart refrigerators
but every little bit of every supply chain that must account for itself as a carbon-intensive Earth
object.

458

Notes

12. Another software trend championed by O’Reilly is Open Stack, a set of tools that allows for,
as it sounds, an open source Stack architecture (in a delimited sense). It also claims to work without the governance of a Benevolent Dictator for Life (BDFL). Many Users may be surprised to
learn that many of the open source software tools they use every day, perhaps without knowing
it, such as Linux, Python, Perl, Drupal, and PHP, are not communitarian anarchies but rather—at
least in the last instance—formal monarchies. I raise the point not so as to recommend that platform states function as Cloud-based monarchies, but to underscore that the reality of order-giving
force and decision making is not a design problem that can avoided by leaving it to the everwidening dining tables of horizontal relational “consensus.”
13. Bernard Tschumi, Architecture and Disjunction (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994).
14. Jean-Luc Godard, Ici et ailleurs (Paris: Gaumont, 1976).
15. It will prove confusing to the left and the right that there is no necessary correspondence
between planning an egalitarian economic system and a sustaining governance of the Anthropocenic ecology. We could have one without the other. With legacy state communism, we can have
strong planning toward egalitarian economics that is also based on ecological devastation (such
as Chavismo), and so it is possible that postcapitalist, postscarcity platform economics providing
a “universal service level” may feature the stark absence of communitarian deliberation and consensus in any sense of vox populi mimesis. Comparing emergent systems to legacy systems (e.g.,
autocracy, anarchy, liberalism) may simply clarify less than it obscures. One would hope, and
one would design on behalf of that hope, for a Stack that unleashes better models.
16. Quentin Meillassoux, “Subtraction and Contraction: Deleuze, Immanence and Matter and
Memory,” in Collapse, vol. 3: Philosophical Research and Development, ed. Robin Mackay (Falmouth, UK: Urbanomic, 2007), 63–107.
17. Or perhaps soft and hard are not the operative distinction when, for example, soft animal
bodies and hard mechanical bodies are understood as together more natural than the nonhuman
machines absorbing and expressing computation. (Perhaps it will shake out in some way that this
constructed mismatch between physical topology and conceptual topology reflects also how
information technology is associated with virtuality and apparition and mechanical technology
with materiality and physicality.) It would appear that the actuality of computation is not only
difficult to imagine but sometimes offensive to afterimages of naturalistic humanism.
18. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dark_Side_of_the_Rainbow and https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v 0gXvVUg-VAE.
19. During a visit to the University of California, San Diego, Ed Keller bought a book from the
campus bookstore that catalogued various forms of exotic psychopathology. As I recall, we spent
much of the afternoon issuing diagnoses to various societal trends. Among these was “apophenia,” the phenomenon whereby someone perceives a direct correlation between two sensory
inputs where none actually exists, such as between an image and sound that are not really in
synchronization but which we perceive as such (such as the old iTunes visualizer that presented
swirling lines supposedly pulsing with the music, but was really just swirling). Dark Side of the

Notes

459

Rainbow is another classic example (Google it). We also discussed “On the Origin of the ‘Influencing Machine’ in Schizophrenia” by Viktor Tausk from 1933, and Karl Popper’s writing on conspiracy theory and narcissistic attribution errors. Popper wrote that members of informationally
and socially isolated groups (which means today any Internet subculture) tend toward a kind of
paranoid cognition. They become suspicious and distrustful of society and susceptible to “sinister
attribution errors.” As Cass Sunstein puts it, “This error occurs when people feel that they are
under pervasive scrutiny, and hence they attribute personalistic motives to outsiders and overestimate the amount of attention they receive. Benign actions that happen to disadvantage the
group are taken as purposeful plots, intended to harm. They overestimate the amount of attention
they receive [emphasis mine]. Benign actions that happen to disadvantage the group are taken as
purposeful plots, intended to harm.” See Cass R. Sunstein and Adrain Vermeule, “Conspiracy
Theories,” Coase-Sandor Working Papers in Law and Economics, University of Chicago Law School,
2008. Keller and I discussed how, in some Software Studies circles, people compare Google
AdWords to the Stasi with a straight face. We discussed how conspiracy theory politics mirrors
the absent User, except that here it is the absent agency. In a way, it is a kind of secular creationism, or at least intelligent design. It holds that systems can’t evolve according to their own selective processes; rather, some agent must have caused this to take place. Google or the NSA, or Bush
or Obama, or the Jews or Goldman Sachs, some absent and abstract Oedipal first mover, must be
the source of this confusion and misery. We discussed the strong gravity field between the overestimation of WikiLeaks’ significance and Truther websites, which suggests that apophenia has,
for the geopolitics of technology, risen to the level of a political ethics, and that the “Influencing
Machine” is no longer the purview of psychiatrists but now also sociologists.
20. “But Palantir’s central privacy and security protection would be what Karp calls, with his
academic’s love of jargon, ‘the immutable log.’ Everything a user does in Palantir creates a trail
that can be audited. No Russian spy, jealous husband or Edward Snowden can use the tool’s abilities without leaving an indelible record of his or her actions. Why had the thought of these data
mining projects analyzing their own use not occurred to me until just now?” Andy Greenberg,
“How a ‘Deviant’ Philosopher Built Palantir, a CIA-Funded Data-Mining Juggernaut,” Forbes,
August 14, 2014, http://www.forbes.com/sites/andygreenberg/2013/08/14/agent-of-intelligencehow-a-deviant-philosopher-built-palantir-a-cia-funded-data-mining-juggernaut/2/.
21. Jacob Appelbaum, Laura Poitras, and Trevor Paglen, “Art as Evidence” (panel at
Transmediale, Haus Der Kulturen Der Welt, Berlin, 2014), http://www.transmediale.de/content/
presentation-by-jacob-applebaum-at-transmediale-2014-keynote-art-as-evidence.
22. See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v ZJ6BuHL0EiQ. Thanks to Serene Han, programmer
at Google Ideas, for helping me understand the uProxy technology.
23. See https://webwewant.org/, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/28/tim
-berners-lee-internet-bill-of-rights-greater-privacy, and Agence France-Presse, “Tim Berners-Lee
Calls for Internet Bill of Rights to Ensure Greater Privacy,” 2014.
24. See http://www.offnow.org/11361, a petition to cut off the water supply to the NSA’s Utah
data center.

460

Notes

25. Eliezer Yudkowsky,“Artificial Intelligence as a Positive and Negative Factor in Global Risk,”
2008, https://intelligence.org/files/AIPosNegFactor.pdf.
26. See https://www.youtube.com/yt/press/statistics.html.

Glossary
1. This definition comes from the interview, “Machine Vision: In Discussion with Benjamin Bratton.” See http://dismagazine.com/issues/73272/benjamin-bratton-machine-vision/



R
An Introduction to Hyperobjects

In The Ecological Thought I coined the term hyperobjects to refer to things
that are massively distributed in time and space relative to humans.1 A
hyperobject could be a black hole. A hyperobject could be the Lago
Agrio oil field in Ecuador, or the Florida Everglades. A hyperobject could
be the biosphere, or the Solar System. A hyperobject could be the sum
total of all the nuclear materials on Earth; or just the plutonium, or the
uranium. A hyperobject could be the very long-lasting product of direct
human manufacture, such as Styrofoam or plastic bags, or the sum of all
the whirring machinery of capitalism. Hyperobjects, then, are “hyper” in
relation to some other entity, whether they are directly manufactured by
humans or not.
Hyperobjects have numerous properties in common. They are viscous,
which means that they “stick” to beings that are involved with them.
They are nonlocal; in other words, any “local manifestation” of a hyperobject is not directly the hyperobject.2 They involve profoundly different
temporalities than the human-scale ones we are used to. In particular,
some very large hyperobjects, such as planets, have genuinely Gaussian
temporality: they generate spacetime vortices, due to general relativity.
Hyperobjects occupy a high-dimensional phase space that results in
their being invisible to humans for stretches of time. And they exhibit
their effects interobjectively; that is, they can be detected in a space that
consists of interrelationships between aesthetic properties of objects.
1

2

A Quake in Being

The hyperobject is not a function of our knowledge: it’s hyper relative to
worms, lemons, and ultraviolet rays, as well as humans.
Hyperobjects have already had a significant impact on human social
and psychic space. Hyperobjects are directly responsible for what I call
the end of the world, rendering both denialism and apocalyptic environmentalism obsolete. Hyperobjects have already ushered in a new human
phase of hypocrisy, weakness, and lameness: these terms have a very specific resonance in this study, and I shall explore them in depth. Hypocrisy
results from the conditions of the impossibility of a metalanguage (and
as I shall explain, we are now freshly aware of these conditions because
of the ecological emergency); weakness from the gap between phenomenon and thing, which the hyperobject makes disturbingly visible; and
lameness from the fact that all entities are fragile (as a condition of possibility for their existence), and hyperobjects make this fragility conspicuous.3 Hyperobjects are also changing human art and experience (the
aesthetic dimension). We are now in what I call the Age of Asymmetry.
Hyperobjects are not just collections, systems, or assemblages of other
objects. They are objects in their own right, objects in a special sense that
I shall elucidate as we proceed through this book. The special sense of
object derives from object-oriented ontology (OOO), an emerging philosophical movement committed to a unique form of realism and nonanthropocentric thinking. Least of all, then, would it be right to say that
hyperobjects are figments of the (human) imagination, whether we think
imagination as a bundling of associations in the style of Hume, or as the
possibility for synthetic judgments a priori, with Kant. Hyperobjects are
real whether or not someone is thinking of them. Indeed, for reasons
given in this study, hyperobjects end the possibility of transcendental
leaps “outside” physical reality. Hyperobjects force us to acknowledge the
immanence of thinking to the physical. But this does not mean that we
are “embedded” in a “lifeworld.”
Hyperobjects thus present philosophy with a difficult, double task.
The first task is to abolish the idea of the possibility of a metalanguage
that could account for things while remaining uncontaminated by them.
For reasons I shall explore, poststructuralist thinking has failed to do
this in some respects, or rather, it didn’t complete the job. The second


A Quake in Being

3

task is to establish what phenomenological “experience” is in the absence
of anything meaningfully like a “world” at all: hence the subtitle, “Philosophy and Ecology after the End of the World.”
I have divided this book into two parts. Since there is a radical split
between the object and its appearance-for some other entity, it seems
appropriate to divide the book in this manner. Hyperobjects require
direct philosophical, historical, and cultural explication, and this suits the
first part of the book. But then we must move on to the human appropriation of hyperobjects, which occupies the second part.
Throughout Hyperobjects I frequently write in a style that the reader
may find “personal”—sometimes provocatively or frustratingly so. This
decision to write somewhat “personally” was influenced by Alphonso
Lingis’s risky and rewarding phenomenology. It seems appropriate. I am
one of the entities caught in the hyperobject I here call global warming
(another decision—I don’t subscribe to calling it climate change: see Figure 1); one of the entities I know quite well. And as an object-oriented
ontologist I hold that all entities (including “myself ”) are shy, retiring
octopuses that squirt out a dissembling ink as they withdraw into the






  





















 

 

 

 

 



Figure 1. Global warming cannot be directly seen, but it can be thought and
computed, as this graph demonstrates. Data from NASA Godard Institute for
Space Studies; graph by Larry Butz.




4

A Quake in Being

ontological shadows. Thus, no discourse is truly “objective,” if that means
that it is a master language that sits “meta” to what it is talking about.
There is also a necessarily iterative, circling style of thought in this book.
This is because one only sees pieces of a hyperobject at any one moment.
Thinking them is intrinsically tricky.
This line of reasoning makes me seem like a postmodernist, though
for reasons that will become clear, the emerging ecological age gets the
idea that “there is no metalanguage” much more powerfully and nakedly
than postmodernism ever did.4 Since for postmodernism “everything
is a metaphor” in some strong sense, all metaphors are equally bad. But
since for me, and indeed for all humans as we transition into the Age
of Asymmetry there are real things for sure, just not as we know them or
knew them, so some metaphors are better than others.5 Yet because there
is nowhere to stand outside of things altogether, it turns out that we
know the truth of “there is no metalanguage” more deeply than its inventors. The globalizing sureness with which “there is no metalanguage” and
“everything is a metaphor” are spoken in postmodernism means that
postmodernism is nothing like what it takes itself to be, and is indeed
just another version of the (white, Western, male) historical project. The
ultimate goal of this project, it seems, was to set up a weird transit lounge
outside of history in which the characters and technologies and ideas of
the ages mill around in a state of mild, semiblissful confusion.
Slowly, however, we discovered that the transit lounge was built on
Earth, which is different from saying that it was part of Nature. (Throughout this book, I capitalize Nature precisely to “denature” it, as one would
do to a protein by cooking it.) “The actual Earth,” as Thoreau puts it, now
contains throughout its circumference a thin layer of radioactive materials, deposited since 1945.6 The deposition of this layer marks a decisive geological moment in the Anthropocene, a geological time marked
by the decisive human “terraforming” of Earth as such.7 The first significant marks were laid down in 1784, when carbon from coal-fired industries began to be deposited worldwide, including in the Arctic, thanks to
the invention of the steam engine by James Watt. The birth of the steam
engine, an all-purpose machine whose all-purpose quality (as noted in
its patent) was precisely what precipitated the industrial age, was an event


A Quake in Being

5

whose significance was not lost on Marx.8 This universal machine (uncanny harbinger of the computer, an even more general machine) could
be connected to vast assemblages of other machines to supply their
motive power, thus giving rise to the assemblages of assemblages that
turn the industrial age into a weird cybernetic system, a primitive artificial intelligence of a sort—to wit, industrial capitalism, with the vampirelike downward causality of the emergent machine level, with its related
machine-like qualities of abstract value, sucking away at the humans
on the levels beneath. After 1945 there began the Great Acceleration, in
which the geological transformation of Earth by humans increased by
vivid orders of magnitude.
Yet like everyone else until about a decade ago, Marx missed the even
bigger picture. Think about it: a geological time (vast, almost unthinkable), juxtaposed in one word with very specific, immediate things—
1784, soot, 1945, Hiroshima, Nagasaki, plutonium. This is not only a
historical age but also a geological one. Or better: we are no longer able
to think history as exclusively human, for the very reason that we are
in the Anthropocene. A strange name indeed, since in this period nonhumans make decisive contact with humans, even the ones busy shoring
up differences between humans and the rest.
The thinking style (and thus the writing style) that this turn of events
necessitates is one in which the normal certainties are inverted, or even
dissolved. No longer are my intimate impressions “personal” in the sense
that they are “merely mine” or “subjective only”: they are footprints of
hyperobjects, distorted as they always must be by the entity in which
they make their mark—that is, me. I become (and so do you) a litmus
test of the time of hyperobjects. I am scooped out from the inside. My
situatedness and the rhetoric of situatedness in this case is not a place
of defensive self-certainty but precisely its opposite.9 That is, situatedness is now a very uncanny place to be, like being the protagonist of a
Wordsworth poem or a character in Blade Runner. I am unable to go
beyond what I have elsewhere called ecomimesis, the (often) first-person
rendering of situatedness “in.”10 This is not to endorse ecomimesis, but to
recognize that there is no outside, no metalanguage. At every turn, however, the reader will discover that the prose in this book sways somewhat


6

A Quake in Being

sickeningly between phenomenological narrative and scientific reason.
Yet just as I am hollowed out by the hyperobject, so by the very same
token the language of science is deprived of its ideological status as cool
impersonality. The more we know about hyperobjects, the stranger they
become. Thus hyperobjects embody a truth about what I once thought
only applied to lifeforms, the truth of the strange stranger.11
What this book seeks then is a weird ecomimesis that tugs at the limits of the rhetorical mode, seeking out its hypocrisy. For reasons I give
later, the term hypocrisy is very carefully chosen. The time of hyperobjects
is a time of hypocrisy. Yet, for the same reasons, seeking out hypocrisy
cannot be done from the point of view of cynicism. If there is no metalanguage, then cynical distance, the dominant ideological mode of the
left, is in very bad shape, and will not be able to cope with the time of
hyperobjects.
There is a further reason why Alphonso Lingis is central to this project. Lingis’s book The Imperative is a remarkable reworking of Kantian
ethics, taking phenomenology into account. The phenomenology in question is Lingis’s own, developed from years of study and affiliation with
Emmanuel Levinas, and very different from the Husserlian phenomenology that is its great-grandparent. In particular, Lingis makes it possible to think a truly ecological ethics. Many of his most potent examples
are drawn from ethical dilemmas concerning ecological action. In the
later sections of this book (contained in part 2: “The Time of Hyperobjects”), I explore in depth why a Lingis-inspired view of ethics is essential
for ecological action. In particular, the section entitled “Hypocrisies”
deals extensively with Lingis’s thought.
Hyperobjects are what have brought about the end of the world.
Clearly, planet Earth has not exploded. But the concept world is no
longer operational, and hyperobjects are what brought about its demise.
The idea of the end of the world is very active in environmentalism. Yet
I argue that this idea is not effective, since, to all intents and purposes,
the being that we are to supposed to feel anxiety about and care for is
gone. This does not mean that there is no hope for ecological politics and
ethics. Far from it. Indeed, as I shall argue, the strongly held belief that
the world is about to end “unless we act now” is paradoxically one of the


A Quake in Being

7

most powerful factors that inhibit a full engagement with our ecological
coexistence here on Earth. The strategy of this book, then, is to awaken
us from the dream that the world is about to end, because action on
Earth (the real Earth) depends on it.
The end of the world has already occurred. We can be uncannily precise about the date on which the world ended. Convenience is not readily associated with historiography, nor indeed with geological time. But
in this case, it is uncannily clear. It was April 1784, when James Watt
patented the steam engine, an act that commenced the depositing of carbon in Earth’s crust—namely, the inception of humanity as a geophysical
force on a planetary scale. Since for something to happen it often needs
to happen twice, the world also ended in 1945, in Trinity, New Mexico,
where the Manhattan Project tested the Gadget, the first of the atom
bombs, and later that year when two nuclear bombs were dropped on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki (Figure 2). These events mark the logarithmic
increase in the actions of humans as a geophysical force.12 They are of
“world-historical” importance for humans—and indeed for any lifeform within range of the fallout— demarcating a geological period, the
largest-scale terrestrial era. I put “world-historical” in quotation marks
because it is indeed the fate of the concept world that is at issue. For what
comes into view for humans at this moment is precisely the end of
the world, brought about by the encroachment of hyperobjects, one of
which is assuredly Earth itself, and its geological cycles demand a geophilosophy that doesn’t think simply in terms of human events and human
significance.
The end of the world is correlated with the Anthropocene, its global
warming and subsequent drastic climate change, whose precise scope
remains uncertain while its reality is verified beyond question. Throughout Hyperobjects I shall be calling it global warming and not climate
change. Why? Whatever the scientific and social reasons for the predominance of the term climate change over global warming for naming this
particular hyperobject, the effect in social and political discourse is plain
enough. There has been a decrease in appropriate levels of concern.
Indeed, denialism is able to claim that using the term climate change is
merely the rebranding of a fabrication, nay evidence of this fabrication


8

A Quake in Being

in flagrante delicto. On the terrain of media and the sociopolitical realm,
the phrase climate change has been such a failure that one is tempted
to see the term itself as a kind of denial, a reaction to the radical trauma
of unprecedented global warming. That the terms are presented as
choices rather than as a package is a symptom of this failure, since logically it is correct to say “climate change as a result of global warming,”
where “climate change” is just a compression of a more detailed phrase,
a metonymy.
If this is not the case, then climate change as a substitute for global warming is like “cultural change” as a substitute for Renaissance, or “change in
living conditions” as a substitute for Holocaust. Climate change as substitute enables cynical reason (both right wing and left) to say that the
“climate has always been changing,” which to my ears sounds like using
“people have always been killing one another” as a fatuous reason not
to control the sale of machine guns. What we desperately need is an
appropriate level of shock and anxiety concerning a specific ecological

Figure 2. Trinity test at 0.016 seconds, July 16, 1945. For some time this picture
was banned, since it was considered far more provocative than the habitual
mushroom cloud. The tiny shapes on the horizon are trees. Los Alamos National
Laboratory.


A Quake in Being

9

trauma—indeed, the ecological trauma of our age, the very thing that
defines the Anthropocene as such. This is why I shall be sticking with the
phrase global warming in this book.
Numerous philosophical approaches have recently arisen as if in response to the daunting, indeed horrifying, coincidence of human history
and terrestrial geology. Speculative realism is the umbrella term for a
movement that comprises such scholars as Graham Harman, Jane Bennett, Quentin Meillassoux, Patricia Clough, Iain Hamilton Grant, Levi
Bryant, Ian Bogost, Steven Shaviro, Reza Negarestani, Ray Brassier, and
an emerging host of others such as Ben Woodard and Paul Ennis. All
are determined to break the spell that descended on philosophy since
the Romantic period. The spell is known as correlationism, the notion
that philosophy can only talk within a narrow bandwidth, restricted to
the human–world correlate: meaning is only possible between a human
mind and what it thinks, its “objects,” flimsy and tenuous as they are. The
problem as correlationism sees it is, is the light on in the fridge when you
close the door?
It’s not quite idealism, but it could tend that way. But the problem goes
back further than the Romantic period, all the way back to the beginning of the modern period. (Unlike Latour, I do believe that we have
“been modern,” and that this has had effects on human and nonhuman
beings.)13 The restriction of philosophy’s bandwidth attempts to resolve
a conundrum that has been obsessing European thinking since at least
the uncritical inheritance by Descartes of the scholastic view of substances—that they are basic lumps decorated with accidents.14 Despite
his revolutionary rationalism—brilliantly deriving reality from his confidence in his (doubting) mental faculties—Descartes uncritically imported
the very scholasticism his work undermined, imported it into the area
that mattered most, the area of ontology. Since then, even to say the word
ontology has been to say something with a whiff of scholasticism about it.
Epistemology gradually took over: How can I know that there are (or are
not) real things? What gives me (or denies me) access to the real? What
defines the possibility of access? The possibility of possibility? These
thoughts even affect those who strove against the trend, such as Schelling
and Heidegger, and the original phenomenologists, whose slogan was “To


10

A Quake in Being

the things themselves!” Speculating outside of the human became a minor
trend, exemplified by the marginalization of Alfred North Whitehead,
who thanks to speculative realism has been enjoying a recent resurgence.
Speculative realism has a healthy impulse to break free of the correlationist circle, the small island of meaning to which philosophy has confined itself. It is as if, since the seventeenth century, thinking has been
cowed by science. Yet science not only cries out for “interpretation”—and
heaven knows some defenses of the humanities these days go as far as to
argue that science needs the humanities for PR purposes. Beyond this,
science doesn’t necessarily know what it is about. For a neo-Darwinist,
reality is mechanisms and algorithmic procedures. For a quantum physicist, things might be very different. Reality might indeed entail a form of
correlationism: the Copenhagen Interpretation is just that. Or everything is made of mind.15 So what is it? Which is it? Asleep at the switch,
philosophy has allowed the default ontology to persist: there are things,
which are basically featureless lumps, and these things have accidental
properties, like cupcakes decorated with colored sprinkles.
This thinking—or the lack thereof—is not unrelated to the eventual
manufacture, testing, and dropping of Little Boy and Fat Man. Epistemological panic is not unrelated to a sclerotic syndrome of “burying the
world in nullity . . . in order to prove it.” 16 This thinking still continues,
despite the fact that thought has already made it irrelevant. The thinking
reaches the more than merely paradoxical idea that if I can evaporate it
in an atomic energy flash, it must be real. The thinking is acted out daily
in drilling, and now “fracking” for oil. The year 1900 or thereabouts
witnessed a number of “prequels” to the realization of the Anthropocene
and the coming of the Great Acceleration. These prequels occurred
within human thinking itself, but it is only in retrospect that humans can
fully appreciate them. Quantum theory, relativity theory, and phenomenology were all born then. Quantum theory blew a huge hole in the
idea of particles as little Ping-Pong balls. Relativity theory destroyed the
idea of consistent objects: things that are identical with themselves and
constantly present all the way down. (Both theories will be discussed at
length in later sections.) Extreme forms of realism in narrative began
to set streams of consciousness free from the people who were having


A Quake in Being

11

them, and the hand-holding benevolent narrator vanished. Monet began
to allow colors and brushstrokes to liberate themselves from specific
forms, and the water in which the water lilies floated, exhibited on the
curving walls of the Orangerie, became the true subject of his painting.
Expressionism abolished the comforting aesthetic distances of Romanticism, causing disturbing, ugly beings to crowd towards the viewer.
What did the “discoveries of 1900” have in common? Water, quanta,
spacetime began to be seen. They were autonomous entities that had all
kinds of strange, unexpected properties. Even consciousness itself was
no longer just a neutral medium: phenomenology made good on the
major philosophical discovery of the Romantic period, the fact of consciousness that “has” a content of some kind.17 Monet had started painting water lilies; or rather, he had started to paint the space in which water
lilies float; or rather, he had started to paint the rippling, reflective object
in which the lilies float—the water. Just as Einstein discovered a rippling,
flowing spacetime, where previously objects had just floated in a void,
Monet discovered the sensuous spaciousness of the canvas itself, just as
later Tarkovsky was to discover the sensuous material of film stock. All
this had been prefigured in the Romantic period with the development
of blank verse narratives, meandering through autobiographical detours.
Suddenly a whole lot more paper was involved.
Around 1900 Edmund Husserl discovered something strange about
objects. No matter how many times you turned around a coin, you never
saw the other side as the other side. The coin had a dark side that was
seemingly irreducible. This irreducibility could easily apply to the ways
in which another object, say a speck of dust, interacted with the coin. If
you thought this through a little more, you saw that all objects were in
some sense irreducibly withdrawn. Yet this made no sense, since we encounter them every waking moment. And this strange dark side applied
equally to the “intentional objects” commonly known as thoughts, a weird
confirmation of the Kantian gap between phenomenon and thing. Kant’s
own example of this gap is highly appropriate for a study of hyperobjects.
Consider raindrops: you can feel them on your head—but you can’t perceive the actual raindrop in itself.18 You only ever perceive your particular, anthropomorphic translation of the raindrops. Isn’t this similar to


12

A Quake in Being

the rift between weather, which I can feel falling on my head, and global
climate, not the older idea of local patterns of weather, but the entire system? I can think and compute climate in this sense, but I can’t directly
see or touch it. The gap between phenomenon and thing yawns open,
disturbing my sense of presence and being in the world. But it is worse
still than even that. Raindrops are raindroppy, not gumdroppy—more’s
the pity. Yet raindrop phenomena are not raindrop things. I cannot
locate the gap between phenomenon and thing anywhere in my given,
phenomenal, experiential, or indeed scientific space. Unfortunately raindrops don’t come with little dotted lines on them and a little drawing
of scissors saying “cut here”—despite the insistence of philosophy from
Plato up until Hume and Kant that there is some kind of dotted line
somewhere on a thing, and that the job of a philosopher is to locate
this dotted line and cut carefully. Because they so massively outscale us,
hyperobjects have magnified this weirdness of things for our inspection:
things are themselves, but we can’t point to them directly.
Around 1900 Einstein discovered something strange about objects.
The speed of light was constant, and this meant that objects couldn’t be
thought of as rigid, extended bodies that maintained their shape. Lorentz
had noticed that electromagnetic waves shrank mysteriously, as if foreshortened, as they approached light speed. By the time you reach the end
of a pencil with your following eyes, the other end has tapered off somewhere. If you put tiny clocks on your eyelids, they would tell a different
time than the tiny clocks on your feet lying still beneath the table as
you twirl the pencil in your fingers, the tiny clocks in each fingernail
registering ever so slightly different times. Of course you wouldn’t see
this very clearly, but if you were moving close to the speed of light,
objects would appear to become translucent and strangely compressed
until they finally disappeared altogether. Spacetime appeared, rippling
and curved like Monet’s water lilies paintings. And there must then be
regions of spacetime that are unavailable to my perception, even though
they are thinkable: another strange confirmation of the Kantian gap between phenomenon and thing.
Around 1900 Max Planck discovered something strange about objects.
If you tried to measure the energy in an enclosed object (like an oven) by


A Quake in Being

13

summing all the waves, you reached absurd results that rocketed toward
infinity above a certain temperature range: the blackbody radiation problem. But if you thought of the energy as distributed into packets, encapsulated in discrete quanta, you got the right result. This accuracy was
bought at the terrible price of realizing the existence of a bizarre quantum world in which objects appeared to be smeared into one another,
occupying indeterminate areas and capable of penetrating through
seemingly solid walls. And this is yet another confirmation of the phenomenon–thing gap opened up by Kant, for the simple reason that to
measure a quantum, you must fire some other quanta at it—to measure
is to deflect, so that position and momentum are not measurable at the
same time.
The Kantian gap between phenomenon and thing places the idea of
substances decorated with accidents under extreme pressure. Drawing
on the breakthroughs of the phenomenologist Husserl, Heidegger perhaps came closest to solving the problem. Heidegger realized that the
cupcakes of substance and the sprinkles of accidence were products of
an “objective presencing” that resulted from a confusion within (human)
being, or Dasein, as he put it. Heidegger, however, is a correlationist who
asserts that without Dasein, it makes no sense whatsoever to talk of the
truth of things, which for him implies their very existence: “Only as long
as Dasein is, ‘is there’ [gibt es] being . . . it can neither be said that beings
are, nor that they are not.”19 How much more correlationist do you want?
The refrigerator itself, let alone the light inside it, only exists when I am
there to open the door. This isn’t quite Berkeleyan esse est percipi, but
it comes close. Heidegger is the one who from within correlationism
descends to a magnificent depth. Yet he is unwilling to step outside the
human–world correlation, and so for him idealism, not realism, holds
the key to philosophy: “If the term idealism amounts to an understanding of the fact that being is never explicable by beings, but is always
already the ‘transcendental’ for every being, then the sole correct possibility for a philosophical problematic lies in idealism.”20
Heidegger had his own confusion, not the least of which is exemplified by his brush with Nazism, which is intimately related to his insight
and blindness about being. Graham Harman, to whose object-oriented


14

A Quake in Being

ontology I subscribe, discovered a gigantic coral reef of sparkling things
beneath the Heideggerian U-boat. The U-boat was already traveling at
a profound ontological depth, and any serious attempt to break through
in philosophy must traverse these depths, or risk being stuck in the cupcake aisle of the ontological supermarket.
Harman achieved this discovery in two ways. The first way is simple
flexibility. Harman was simply ready to drop the specialness of Dasein,
its unique applicability to the human, in particular to German humans.
This readiness is itself a symptom of the ecological era into which we
have entered, the time of hyperobjects. To this effect, Harman was unwilling to concede Heidegger the point that the physical reality described
in Newton’s laws did not exist before Newton.21 This line of Heidegger’s
thought is even more correlationist than Kant’s. The second way in
which Harman attacked the problem was by a thorough reading of the
startling tool-analysis in the opening sections of Heidegger’s Being and
Time. This reading demonstrates that nothing in the “later” Heidegger,
its plangency notwithstanding, topples the tool-analysis from the apex of
Heidegger’s thinking. Heidegger, in other words, was not quite conscious
of the astonishing implications of the discovery he made in the toolanalysis: that when equipment—which for all intents and purposes could
be anything at all—is functioning, or “executing” (Vollzug), it withdraws
from access (Entzug); that it is only when a tool is broken that it seems
to become present-at-hand (vorhanden). This can only mean, argues
Harman, that there is a vast plenum of unique entities, one of whose
essential properties is withdrawal—no other entity can fully account for
them. These entities must exist in a relatively flat ontology in which there
is hardly any difference between a person and a pincushion. And relationships between them, including causal ones, must be vicarious and
hence aesthetic in nature.
If we are to take seriously the ontological difference between being
and beings, argues Harman, then what this means is twofold:
(1) No realism is tenable that only bases its findings on “ontic” data that
are pregiven. This would be like thinking with prepackaged
concepts—it would not be like thinking at all.


A Quake in Being

15

(2) Idealism, however, is unworkable, since there exist real things whose
core reality is withdrawn from access, even by themselves.

Point (1), incidentally, is the trouble with science. Despite the refreshing
and necessary skepticism and ruthless doubt of science, scientific discoveries are necessarily based on a decision about what real things are.22
Point (2) is the primary assertion of OOO, Harman’s coral reef beneath
the Heideggerian U-boat.
It will become increasingly clear as this book proceeds that hyperobjects are not simply mental (or otherwise ideal) constructs, but are real
entities whose primordial reality is withdrawn from humans. Hyperobjects give us a platform for thinking what Harman calls objects in general. This introduction is not quite the right moment for a full explication
of OOO. Outlining OOO might mean that we never got around to hyperobjects themselves. And, more significantly, the subtlety of OOO itself
requires a thorough examination of hyperobjects. Moreover, it seems like
good practice to start with the things at hand and feel our way forward—
in this I join Lingis. Yet I trust that by the end of the book the reader will
have a reasonable grasp of how one might use this powerful new philosophical approach for finding out real things about real things.
So, let’s begin to think about hyperobjects in some depth. What is the
most striking thing about their appearance in the human world? Naturally humans have been aware of enormous entities—some real, some
imagined—for as long as they have existed. But this book is arguing that
there is something quite special about the recently discovered entities,
such as climate. These entities cause us to reflect on our very place on
Earth and in the cosmos. Perhaps this is the most fundamental issue—
hyperobjects seem to force something on us, something that affects some
core ideas of what it means to exist, what Earth is, what society is.
What is special about hyperobjects? There’s no doubt that cosmic
phenomena such as meteors and blood-red Moons, tsunamis, tornadoes, and earthquakes have terrified humans in the past. Meteors and
comets were known as disasters. Literally, a disaster is a fallen, dysfunctional, or dangerous, or evil, star (dis-astron). But such disasters take
place against a stable background in at least two senses. There is the


16

A Quake in Being

Ptolemaic–Aristotelian machinery of the spheres, which hold the fixed
stars in place. This system was common to Christian, Muslim, and Jewish cosmology in the Middle Ages. To be a disaster, a “star” such as a
meteor must deviate from this harmonious arrangement or celestial
machinery. Meanwhile, back on Earth, the shooting star is a portent that
makes sense as a trace on the relatively stable horizon of earth and sky.
Perhaps the apocalypse will happen. But not just yet. Likewise, other cultures seemed to have relatively coherent ways of explaining catastrophes.
In Japanese Shinto, a tsunami is the vengeance of a Kami who has been
angered in some way.
It seems as if there is something about hyperobjects that is more
deeply challenging than these “disasters.” They are entities that become
visible through post-Humean statistical causality—a causality that is actually better for realism than simply positing the existence of glass spheres
on which the fixed stars rotate, to give one example. This point never
fails to be lost on global warming deniers, who assert, rightly, that one
can never directly prove the human causes of global warming, just as I
never prove that this bullet you fire into my head will kill me. But the
extreme statistical likelihood of anthropogenic global warming is better
than simply asserting a causal factoid. Global warming denial is also in
denial about what causality is after Hume and Kant—namely a feature of
phenomena, rather than things in themselves.
What does this mean to nascent ecological awareness? It means that
humans are not totally in charge of assigning significance and value to
events that can be statistically measured. The worry is not whether the
world will end, as in the old model of the dis-astron, but whether the end
of the world is already happening, or whether perhaps it might already
have taken place. A deep shuddering of temporality occurs. Furthermore, hyperobjects seem to continue what Sigmund Freud considered
the great humiliation of the human following Copernicus and Darwin.
Jacques Derrida rightly adds Freud to the list of humiliators—after all
he displaces the human from the very center of psychic activity. But we
might also add Marx, who displaces human social life with economic
organization. And we could add Heidegger and Derrida himself, who in
related though subtly different ways displace the human from the center


A Quake in Being

17

of meaning-making. We might further expand the list by bringing in
Nietzsche and his lineage, which now runs through Deleuze and Guattari to Brassier: “Who gave us the sponge to wipe away the entire horizon?” (Nietzsche).23 And in a different vein, we might add that OOO
radically displaces the human by insisting that my being is not everything it’s cracked up to be—or rather that the being of a paper cup is as
profound as mine.
Is it that hyperobjects seem to push this work of humiliation to a
yet more extreme limit? What is this limit? Copernicus, it is said, is all
about displacement. This was first taken to mean an exhilarating jump
into cognitive hyperspace. But what if the hyperobjects force us to forget
even this exit strategy? What if hyperobjects finally force us to realize
the truth of the word humiliation itself, which means being brought low,
being brought down to earth? Hyperobjects, in effect, seem to push us
into a double displacement. For now the possibility that we have loosed
the shackles of the earthly to touch the face of the “human form divine”
(Blake) seems like a wish fulfillment.24 According to hyperobjects themselves, who seem to act a little bit like the gigantic boot at the end of the
Monty Python credits, outer space is a figment of our imagination: we are
always inside an object.
What we have then, before and up to the time of hyperobjects from
the sixteenth century on, is the truth of Copernicanism, if we can call
it that—there is no center and we don’t inhabit it. Yet added to this is
another twist: there is no edge! We can’t jump out of the universe. Queen
Mab can’t take Ianthe out of her bed, put her in a spaceship, and whisk
her to the edge of time to see everything perfectly (Percy Shelley’s fantasy). Synthetic judgments a priori are made inside an object, not in some
transcendental sphere of pure freedom. Quentin Meillassoux describes
Kant’s self-described Copernican turn a Ptolemaic counterrevolution,
shutting knowing up in the finitude of the correlation between (human)
subject and world.25 But for me, it is the idea of a privileged transcendental sphere that constitutes the problem, not the finitude of the human–
world correlation. Kant imagines that although we are limited in this way,
our transcendental faculties are at least metaphorically floating in space
beyond the edge of the universe, an argument to which Meillassoux


18

A Quake in Being

himself cleaves in his assertion that reality is finally knowable exclusively
by (human) subjectivity. And that is the problem, the problem called
anthropocentrism.
It is Kant who shows, at the very inception of the Anthropocene, that
things never coincide with their phenomena. All we need to do is extend
this revolutionary insight beyond the human–world gap. Unlike Meillassoux, we are not going to try to bust through human finitude, but to
place that finitude in a universe of trillions of finitudes, as many as there
are things—because a thing just is a rift between what it is and how it
appears, for any entity whatsoever, not simply for that special entity
called the (human) subject. What ecological thought must do, then, is
unground the human by forcing it back onto the ground, which is to say,
standing on a gigantic object called Earth inside a gigantic entity called
biosphere. This grounding of Kant began in 1900. Phenomenology per se
is what begins to bring Kantianism down to Earth, but it’s hyperobjects
and OOO that really convince me that it’s impossible to escape the gravitational field of “sincerity,” “ingenuousness,” being-there.26 Not because
there is a there—we have already let go of that. Here I must part company with ecophenomenology, which insists on regressing to fantasies
of embeddedness. No: we are not in the center of the universe, but we
are not in the VIP box beyond the edge, either. To say the least, this is a
profoundly disturbing realization. It is the true content of ecological
awareness. Harman puts it this way:
On the one hand, scientism insists that human consciousness is nothing
special, and should be naturalized just like everything else. On the other
hand, it also wants to preserve knowledge as a special kind of relation to
the world quite different from the relations that raindrops and lizards have
to the world. . . . For all their gloating over the fact that people are pieces
of matter just like everything else, they also want to claim that the very
status of that utterance is somehow special. For them, raindrops know
nothing and lizards know very little, and some humans are more knowledgeable than others. This is only possible because thought is given a
unique ability to negate and transcend immediate experience, which inanimate matter is never allowed to do in such theories, of course. In short,


A Quake in Being

19

for all its noir claims that the human doesn’t exist, it elevates the structure
of human thought to the ontological pinnacle.27

The effect of this double denial of human supremacy is not unlike one of
Hitchcock’s signature cinematic techniques, the pull focus. By simultaneously zooming and pulling away, we appear to be in the same place,
yet the place seems to distort beyond our control. The two contradictory
motions don’t cancel one another out. Rather, they reestablish the way
we experience “here.” The double denial doesn’t do away with human
experience. Rather, it drastically modifies it in a dizzying manner.
The ecological thought that thinks hyperobjects is not one in which
individuals are embedded in a nebulous overarching system, or conversely, one in which something vaster than individuals extrudes itself
into the temporary shapes of individuals. Hyperobjects provoke irreductionist thinking, that is, they present us with scalar dilemmas in which
ontotheological statements about which thing is the most real (ecosystem, world, environment, or conversely, individual) become impossible.28
Likewise, irony qua absolute distance also becomes inoperative. Rather
than a vertiginous antirealist abyss, irony presents us with intimacy with
existing nonhumans.
The discovery of hyperobjects and OOO are symptoms of a fundamental shaking of being, a being-quake. The ground of being is shaken.
There we were, trolling along in the age of industry, capitalism, and technology, and all of a sudden we received information from aliens, information that even the most hardheaded could not ignore, because the
form in which the information was delivered was precisely the instrumental and mathematical formulas of modernity itself. The Titanic of
modernity hits the iceberg of hyperobjects. The problem of hyperobjects, I argue, is not a problem that modernity can solve. Unlike Latour
then, although I share many of his basic philosophical concerns, I believe
that we have been modern, and that we are only just learning how not
to be.
Because modernity banks on certain forms of ontology and epistemology to secure its coordinates, the iceberg of hyperobjects thrusts a
genuine and profound philosophical problem into view. It is to address


20

A Quake in Being

these problems head on that this book exists. This book is part of the
apparatus of the Titanic, but one that has decided to dash itself against
the hyperobject. This rogue machinery—call it speculative realism, or
OOO—has decided to crash the machine, in the name of a social and
cognitive configuration to come, whose outlines are only faintly visible
in the Arctic mist of hyperobjects. In this respect, hyperobjects have
done us a favor. Reality itself intervenes on the side of objects that from
the prevalent modern point of view—an emulsion of blank nothingness
and tiny particles—are decidedly medium-sized. It turns out that these
medium-sized objects are fascinating, horrifying, and powerful.
For one thing, we are inside them, like Jonah in the Whale. This means
that every decision we make is in some sense related to hyperobjects.
These decisions are not limited to sentences in texts about hyperobjects.
When I turn the key in the ignition of my car, I am relating to global
warming. When a novelist writes about emigration to Mars, he is relating to global warming. Yet my turning of the key in the ignition is intimately related to philosophical and ideological decisions stemming from
the mathematization of knowing and the view of space and time as flat,
universal containers (Descartes, Newton). The reason why I am turning my key—the reason why the key turn sends a signal to the fuel injection system, which starts the motor—is one result of a series of decisions
about objects, motion, space, and time. Ontology, then, is a vital and
contested political terrain. It is on this terrain that this study will concentrate a significant amount of attention. In the menacing shadow of
hyperobjects, contemporary decisions to ground ethics and politics in
somewhat hastily cobbled together forms of process thinking and relationism might not simply be rash—they might be part of the problem.
The “towering-through” (Heidegger) of the hyperobject into the misty
transcendentalism of modernity interrupts the supposed “progress” that
thinking has been making toward assimilating the entire universe to a
late capitalism-friendly version of Macbeth, in which (in the phrase
Marx quotes) “all that is solid melts into air.”29 For at the very point at
which the melting into air occurs, we catch the first glimpses of the alltoo-solid iceberg within the mist. For reasons I give in the second part
of this book, I doubt gravely whether capitalism is entirely up for the job


A Quake in Being

21

of processing hyperobjects. I have argued elsewhere that since the raw
machinery of capitalism is reactive rather than proactive, it might contain a flaw that makes it unable to address the ecological emergency
fully.30 Capitalism builds on existing objects such as “raw materials”
(whatever comes in at the factory door). The retroactive style of capitalism is reflected in the ideology of “the consumer” and its “demands” that
capital then “meets.”
The ship of modernity is equipped with powerful lasers and nuclear
weapons. But these very devices set off chain reactions that generate yet
more hyperobjects that thrust themselves between us and the extrapolated, predicted future. Science itself becomes the emergency break that
brings the adventure of modernity to a shuddering halt. But this halt is
not in front of the iceberg. The halting is (an aspect of) the iceberg. The
fury of the engines is precisely how they cease to function, seized up by
the ice that is already inside them. The future, a time “after the end of the
world,” has arrived too early.
Hyperobjects are a good candidate for what Heidegger calls “the last
god,” or what the poet Hölderlin calls “the saving power” that grows
alongside the dangerous power.31 We were perhaps expecting an eschatological solution from the sky, or a revolution in consciousness—or,
indeed, a people’s army seizing control of the state. What we got instead
came too soon for us to anticipate it. Hyperobjects have dispensed with
two hundred years of careful correlationist calibration. The panic and
denial and right-wing absurdity about global warming are understandable. Hyperobjects pose numerous threats to individualism, nationalism,
anti-intellectualism, racism, speciesism, anthropocentrism, you name it.
Possibly even capitalism itself.
With a view to explicating how hyperobjects are already here, this
book consists of a diptych that folds around its middle. First, the basic
shock of hyperobjects is elucidated: the iceberg appears. In this way, the
book preserves the feeling that we humans are playing catch-up with
reality. In part 1, “What Are Hyperobjects?,” I explore the scope and
depth of the quake in being from the viewpoint of “objective” description, trying to evoke the objectness of hyperobjects, which consists primordially in their being prior to thinking. The book then cuts ruthlessly


22

A Quake in Being

to the “reaction shot”—how the dawn of hyperobjects appears for us
humans, its implications for our social coexistence, and the thinking that
goes along with this coexistence. Hyperobjects are the harbingers of a truly
“post-modern” age.32 Thus part 2 is entitled “The Time of Hyperobjects.”
All humans, I shall argue, are now aware that they have entered a new
phase of history in which nonhumans are no longer excluded or merely
decorative features of their social, psychic, and philosophical space. From
the most vulnerable Pacific Islander to the most hardened eliminative
materialist, everyone must reckon with the power of rising waves and
ultraviolet light. This phase is characterized by a traumatic loss of coordinates, “the end of the world.” It also consists of an embarrassing shock to
the shock troops of critique, in the form of an all-encompassing hypocrisy
that demonstrates, physically and without compromise, the weirdness of
the Lacanian truth that “there is no metalanguage.”33 This truth was by
no means secured by poststructuralist and postmodern thinking.
Humans have entered an age of hypocrisy, weakness, and lameness,
terms that have a specific valence and definition that I elucidate in part
2. The overall aesthetic “feel” of the time of hyperobjects is a sense of
asymmetry between the infinite powers of cognition and the infinite
being of things. There occurs a crazy arms race between what we know
and what is, in which the technology of what we know is turned against
itself. The arms race sets new parameters for aesthetic experience and
action, which I take in the widest possible sense to mean the ways in
which relations between beings play out. Very significant consequences
for art emerge, and the book ends by outlining some of them.
The frequent visitor to my writing will perhaps be somewhat puzzled, even disconcerted, by the substantial use of Heidegger. In the past
I have described Heideggerian philosophy as regressive and unsuitable
for thinking some of the more significant features of what I have called
ecology without Nature. I have come to recognize that it is not so much
Heidegger as a type of Heideggerianism against which I have been reacting. If anyone gives us a vivid sense of the uncanny strangeness of coexistence, it is Heidegger. I have also come to understand, against Levinas,
that it is indeed on the terrain of ontology that many of the urgent ecological battles need to be fought.


A Quake in Being

23

The reasons for my turn to Heidegger are, without doubt, not acceptable to Heideggerianism at large, and this means that certain strands of
thinking in Heidegger are also rejected. The concept world remains deeply
problematic, as the subsection on that concept in part 2 makes clear.
The frankly ontotheological positing of humans as the most important
entity, and of German humans as the quintessence of this importance,
is also ruthlessly rejected. It is through OOO that this book owes its
debt to Heidegger. There is something attractive—perhaps suspiciously
so, as it resonates with a Christian image—in the idea of a stone that
the builders rejected becoming the cornerstone of new thinking. The
time of hyperobjects makes use of what appears merely to be a broken
tool lying around in the workshop of thinking—I refer to Heidegger’s
tool-analysis, which until Harman’s strikingly innovative appropriation
of it, lay around in the shop, half heartedly handled by pragmatism and
ignored by deconstruction. The turn to the tool-analysis in OOO and in
“thing theory” is welcome.34
By some strange, non-Hegelian magic of the negative, it is this very
tool that is the “saving power” of which Hölderlin and Heidegger speak,
a mute, brutal thing resonant with all the anthropocentric force of accumulated human prejudice. The Pixar movie Wall•E is the story of how
broken tools save the Earth.35 So is this book. In Wall•E, the broken tools
are two obsessive robots: one, the protagonist, with his melancholy collection of human trinkets; the other, a cleaning robot whose compulsion
to wipe every surface forces him between two closing sliding doors at
a crucial juncture. In this book, the two robots are the two parts of the
book. Part 1 of Hyperobjects is the obsessive melancholic that catalogs
the surfaces and dimensions of the hyperobject. Part 2 is the compulsive
robot that holds open the sliding doors of history just as they appear to
be snapping shut, imprisoning us in modernity forever.
Since it is not possible for me not to anthropomorphize, since I am
a human, the first part of the book will also contain some thoughts on
hyperobjects as they pertain to humans. Yet since I am not totally stuck
“inside” some casket-like space of humanness, the second part of the
book will contain some further details on the qualities of hyperobjects
themselves. Hyperobjects seem to have five interrelated qualities. Or


24

A Quake in Being

rather these qualities provide more and more accurate modes of human
attunement to hyperobjects. Part 1 thus starts with an overall quality
of hyperobjects (viscosity) and moves through three categories until we
arrive at the fifth section (on interobjectivity), in which it becomes clear
that hyperobjects force us to rethink what we mean by object. The three
categories are nonlocality, temporal undulation, and phasing.
The human reaction to the time of hyperobjects takes three basic
forms, which I designate using the three sections in part 2. The first form
of reaction is the dissolution of the notion of world. The second reaction
is the impossibility of maintaining cynical distance, the dominant ideological mode of our age (or rather, the time before the time of hyperobjects). The third reaction has to do with what kinds of aesthetic experience
and practice are now thinkable in the time of hyperobjects. Throughout
part 2, I argue that the time of hyperobjects is an age of hypocrisy, weakness, and lameness.

I do not access hyperobjects across a distance, through some transparent
medium. Hyperobjects are here, right here in my social and experiential
space. Like faces pressed against a window, they leer at me menacingly:
their very nearness is what menaces. From the center of the galaxy, a
supermassive black hole impinges on my awareness, as if it were sitting
in the car next to me at the traffic lights. Every day, global warming
burns the skin on the back of my neck, making me itch with physical discomfort and inner anxiety. Evolution unfolds in my genome as my cells
divide and mutate, as my body clones itself, as one of my sperm cells
mixes it up with an egg. As I reach for the iPhone charger plugged into
the dashboard, I reach into evolution, into the extended phenotype that
doesn’t stop at the edge of my skin but continues into all the spaces my
humanness has colonized.1
On every right side mirror of every American car is engraved an
ontological slogan that is highly appropriate for our time: objects in
mirror are closer than they appear. Not only do I fail to access
hyperobjects at a distance, but it also becomes clearer with every passing
day that “distance” is only a psychic and ideological construct designed to
protect me from the nearness of things. There is a reason why they call it
“the schizophrenic defense” when someone has a psychotic break. Could
it be that the very attempt to distance is not a product of some true
assessment of things, but is and was always a defense mechanism against
27

28

Viscosity

a threatening proximity? So is that environmentalist speech that demands that we “get back to Nature”—that is, achieve a greater intimacy
with things—only half right? Is there is nothing to “get back to,” since the
problem is not that things are truly distant, but that they are in our face—
they are our face? Is this very environmentalism caught up in warding
off the threatening nearness of things? That the concept Nature is an
“object in mirror” whose referents are much, much closer than a view
from the front seat of an SUV careering across the Tibetan plateau; or
from behind a camera while I stand in the Arches National Park, Utah;
or even as I unzip my tent flap in the middle of “it”?
In the sections that compose part 1, I attempt to specify hyperobjects
with greater and greater accuracy. There is a logic to the sequence, beginning with this section, in which I describe hyperobjects as viscous.
While hyperobjects are near, they are also very uncanny. Some days,
global warming fails to heat me up. It is strangely cool or violently stormy.
My intimate sensation of prickling heat at the back of my neck is only a
distorted print of the hot hand of global warming. I do not feel “at home”
in the biosphere. Yet it surrounds me and penetrates me, like the Force
in Star Wars. The more I know about global warming, the more I realize
how pervasive it is. The more I discover about evolution, the more I realize how my entire physical being is caught in its meshwork. Immediate,
intimate symptoms of hyperobjects are vivid and often painful, yet they
carry with them a trace of unreality. I am not sure where I am anymore.
I am at home in feeling not at home. Hyperobjects, not some hobbit hole,
not some national myth of the homeland, have finally forced me to see
the truth in Heidegger.
The more I struggle to understand hyperobjects, the more I discover
that I am stuck to them. They are all over me. They are me. I feel like Neo
in The Matrix, lifting to his face in horrified wonder his hand coated in
the mirrorlike substance into which the doorknob has dissolved, as his
virtual body begins to disintegrate. “Objects in mirror are closer than
they appear.” The mirror itself has become part of my flesh. Or rather,
I have become part of the mirror’s flesh, reflecting hyperobjects everywhere. I can see data on the mercury and other toxins in my blood. At
Taipei Airport, a few weeks after the Fukushima disaster, I am scanned


Viscosity

29

for radiation since I have just transited in Tokyo. Every attempt to pull
myself free by some act of cognition renders me more hopelessly stuck
to hyperobjects. Why?
They are already here. I come across them later, I find myself poisoned
with them, I find my hair falling out. Like an evil character in a David
Lynch production, or a ghost in M. Knight Shyamalan’s The Sixth Sense,
hyperobjects haunt my social and psychic space with an always-already.
My normal sense of time as a container, or a racetrack, or a street, prevents me from noticing this always-already, from which time oozes and
flows, as I shall discuss in a later section (“Temporal Undulation”). What
the demonic Twin Peaks character Bob reveals, for our purposes, is something about hyperobjects, perhaps about objects in general.2 Hyperobjects
are agents.3 They are indeed more than a little demonic, in the sense that
they appear to straddle worlds and times, like fiber optic cables or electromagnetic fields. And they are demonic in that through them causalities flow like electricity.
We haven’t thought this way about things since the days of Plato.
What Ion and Socrates call a daimon, we call electromagnetic waves,
which amplify plucked guitar strings and broadcast them through a PA
system.4 Since the beginning of the Anthropocene, but particularly since
the start of the Great Acceleration (the 1940s), these demonic channels
have become more and more powerful. Human artists have become
rhapsodes: Jackson Pollock, John Cage, William Burroughs. Under these
circumstances, it becomes possible to understand why many have thought
art to be a domain of evil.
When I listen to My Bloody Valentine, I do not reach out toward
the sound—instead, I am assaulted from the inside by a pulsation that is
also sound, a physical force that almost lifts me off the floor. Kevin
Shields’s guitar sears into me like an x-ray, scanning me, strafing me.
The chords lurch around one another sickeningly, gliding in and out
of tune, amassing towers of harmonics through dissonance. Distortion
pulps and fragments the sound into a welter of gravel and thick oil. Yet try
as I might, I can’t tear my ears away. The music is so beautiful. I wonder
how Odysseus felt, strapped to the mast as he heard the Sirens. I think I
can hear singing, a quiet, wistful song. Inside the bubble is the pattering


30

Viscosity

ooze of guitar distortion washed with cymbals. I think that this music
could liquefy my internal organs, make my ears bleed (this has actually
occurred), send me into seizures. Perhaps it could kill me. To be killed
by intense beauty, what a Keatsian way to die. I think of the planetdestroying sound system of the band Disaster Area in Douglas Adams’s
The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy, which begins Ursula Heise’s discussion of planetary consciousness.5
My Bloody Valentine’s singer, Belinda Butcher, places her voice on
either side of the stereo image, at extreme right and left. Her voice becomes the fragile bubble container for the onslaught of glittering guitar
fog from Kevin Shields. It becomes ambient (the Latin ambo means
“on both sides”). We hardly hear it. It’s as if her voice contained a hyperobject, the surging, sickening slides, lurches, and poundings of guitar.
In this sense My Bloody Valentine’s music is more truly ecological than
representational “nature” music, and more uncompromising than quiet
ambient music.
Kant argues that aesthetic experience is an attunement (Stimmung).6
But I do not attune to My Bloody Valentine. Rather, My Bloody Valentine
tunes to me, pursuing my innards, searching out the resonant frequencies
of my stomach, my intestines, the pockets of gristle in my face. Yet always
with those beautiful chords, the ones that lash you to the mast. The walls
of feedback that the Velvet Underground inaugurated in “Heroin” are
sound as hyperobject, a sound from which I can’t escape, a viscous
sonic latex. It hurts me. A strange masochistic dimension of aesthetic
experience opens up underneath the one in which the “art object” and I
appear to be held in a perfect Kantian mind meld. Prior to this appearance of the beautiful, there must already be a sticky mesh of viscosity in
which I find myself tuned by the object, an aesthetic uterus that subtends
even my supposed acts of transcendence. Hyperobjective art makes visible, audible, and legible this intrauterine experience that Sartre loathed,
the “sly solidarity” between things: “The slimy is myself.”7 Viscosity for
Sartre is how a hand feels when it plunges into a large jar of honey—it
begins to dissolve: “The sugary death of the For-itself (like that of a wasp
which sinks into the jam and drowns in it).”8 The old art theories that


Viscosity

31

separated sweetness and power collapse.9 For sweetness, it turns out, just
is power: the most powerful thing.
It is possible to imagine a sound so piercing that it could rearrange
our inner structure and result in our death, and no doubt the Pentagon
is now developing, and possibly even deploying, such sound weapons.
When the inside of a thing coincides perfectly with its outside, that is
called dissolution or death. Given a large enough hyperobject (say the
entropy of the entire universe) all beings exist in the jaws of some form
of death, which is why Buddhist thangkas of the Wheel of Life depict the
six realms of existence cycling around within the open, toothy mouth of
Yama, the Lord of Death. Reza Negarestani imagines the machinations
of Earth below its surface as a series of agents that humans unwittingly
unleash on themselves and the rest of Earth, in a demonic parody of
environmentalist nonfiction: “The surface biosphere has never been separate from the cthulhoid architecture of the nether.”10 Dust and wind
are imagined as swirling beings that generate a “mistmare,” enveloping
humans in a literal “fog of war” in which America and the Middle East
haplessly wage war on behalf of cthonic agents they do not understand:
weather as monster.11
A baby vomits curdled milk. She learns to distinguish between the
vomit and the not-vomit, and comes to know the not-vomit as self.12
Every subject is formed at the expense of some viscous, slightly poisoned
substance, possibly teeming with bacteria, rank with stomach acid. The
parent scoops up the mucky milk in a tissue and flushes the wadded package down the toilet. Now we know where it goes. For some time we may
have thought that the U-bend in the toilet was a convenient curvature
of ontological space that took whatever we flush down it into a totally
different dimension called Away, leaving things clean over here. Now we
know better: instead of the mythical land Away, we know the waste goes
to the Pacific Ocean or the wastewater treatment facility. Knowledge of
the hyperobject Earth, and of the hyperobject biosphere, presents us with
viscous surfaces from which nothing can be forcibly peeled. There is no
Away on this surface, no here and no there. In effect, the entire Earth is
a wadded tissue of vomited milk.


32

Viscosity

The very attempt to introduce coherence in psychic and social space
has resulted in the return of this wadded tissue, not the revenge of Gaia
but something far more disturbingly prosaic yet also hauntingly weird.13
Light itself is the most viscous thing of all, since nothing can surpass its
speed. Radiation is Sartre’s jar of honey par excellence, a luminous honey
that reveals our bone structure as it seeps around us. Again, it’s not a
matter of making some suicidal leap into the honey, but of discovering
that we are already inside it. This is it folks, this is ecological interconnectedness, come in and join the fun! But I see, you are already here.
Hyperobjects are viscous.
Along with this vivid intimacy goes a sense of unreality. Thus, there
emerges the fully demonic quality of contemporary ecological experience,
mimed in post-1945 art. The intensity of the hyperobject’s aesthetic trace
seems unreal in its very luminosity. The vastness of the hyperobject’s
scale makes smaller beings—people, countries, even continents—seem
like an illusion, or a small colored patch on a large dark surface. How can
we know it is real? What does real mean? The threat of global warming is not only political, but also ontological. The threat of unreality is
the very sign of reality itself. Like a nightmare that brings news of some
real psychic intensity, the shadow of the hyperobject announces the existence of the hyperobject.
We find ourselves caught in them. The name of this trap is viscosity. In
the final episode of Twin Peaks, Dale Cooper enters the demonic Black
Lodge. He is offered a cup of coffee, his favorite beverage, the drink with
which we often mark time (as with the coffee break or morning coffee).
Yet when he tries to drink it, he finds that the coffee has frozen into a
solid plastic lump of darkness. It is as if time has stopped. Then he tries
to pour it again, and it spills on his legs, burning him. Time flows at a
human speed. Then when he pours it once again, it oozes out of the cup
like the “burnt engine oil” whose smell coats the surface of the entrance
to the Black Lodge. What is real? It is as if we are seeing the same events
happening from the points of view of different beings, with very different
temporalities. The prophetic dreams and dreamlike sequences (and how
can we truly distinguish between what is a dream and what is merely
“dreamlike”?) in Twin Peaks are of a piece with this molten time. Cooper


Viscosity

33

warns Laura Palmer before she has even been murdered, speaking to her
from inside the Black Lodge. Viscosity is a feature of the way in which
time emanates from objects, rather than being a continuum in which
they float.
When the BP Deepwater Horizon disaster happened in 2010, nonhumans and humans alike were coated with a layer of oil, inside and outside their bodies (Figure 3). While the media has moved on to other
spectacles, the oil continues to act. Around Chernobyl there is an uncanny dead zone, the Zone of Alienation, named the Red Forest for when
the trees had become ginger brown and died (the notion of zones will
become a significant analytical tool later in this book). In 2002 three wandering woodcutters in a north Georgian forest near the village of Liya
discovered two small cylinders of radioactive strontium-90 that kept
them warm for a few hours’ sleep before they succumbed to radiation

Figure 3. Deepwater Horizon oil spill captured by NASA’s Terra satellite on May
24, 2010. Humans now have the ability to track gigantic fluid forms such as this—
and the ability to make them.


34

Viscosity

sickness and burning.14 Strontium-90 emits beta rays, quanta that can
pass through skin; beta rays release a great deal of heat when they strike
other quanta. The exposed strontium-90 sources emitted thirty-five
thousand curies each, giving a fatal dose of radiation in two minutes.
The strontium-90 was used in radiothermal generators of electricity: the
Soviet Union employed many in remote locations, while there are radiothermal batteries aboard Voyagers 1 and 2, which are now exiting the
Solar System, passing through the heliosheath, a hyperobject consisting
of slowed, turbulent solar winds formed into million-mile-wide bubbles
as they interact with the interstellar medium.
In 2006, beagles encased in concrete were dug up near to the exit of
the highway that leads to the University of California at Davis. From the
1960s to the 1980s in the Laboratory for Energy Related Research, scientists had exposed the dogs throughout their necessarily brief lives to
strontium-90 and radium-226. Feeding began twenty-one days into gestation (the dogs were fed “by maternal administration”). The dogs who
ingested the maximum 12 microcuries per day, died after a median 5.2
years.15 One microcurie is the radiation activity of a millionth of a gram
of radium-226. The most spectacular scalar discrepancies exist between
the size of an ionizing particle emitted by an isotope and the long-term
effects of radiation on lifeforms and other entities.
At the Trinity Test Site in New Mexico, weird light-green glass (trinitite) was formed when the nuclear explosion fused sand to ten thousand
times hotter than the surface of the sun (Figure 4). Robert Oppenheimer
named it Trinity after one of John Donne’s Holy Sonnets: “Batter my
heart, three-personed God.”16 Oppenheimer thought of Shiva after the
explosion: “I am become death, the shatterer of worlds.”17 Oppenheimer
had not become death. That role goes fair and square to the hyperobject.
It’s oil we must thank for burning a hole in the notion of world. What
kind of hole? A sticky hole, like a ball of tar. Return to the scene in which
Neo touches a mirror in The Matrix, the mirror seems to melt and coat
his flesh, and he raises his hand and regards it with fascinated horror.
The mirror has ceased to be merely a reflective surface; it has become a
viscous substance that adheres to his hand. The very thing that we use to
reflect becomes an object in its own right, liquid and dark like oil in the


Viscosity

35

dim light of the room in which Neo has taken the red pill. The usual
reading of this scene is that Neo’s reality is dissolving. If we stay on the
level of the sticky, oily mirror, however, we obtain an equally powerful
reading. It’s not reality but the subject that dissolves, the very capacity to
“mirror” things, to be separate from the world like someone looking at
a reflection in a mirror—removed from it by an ontological sheath of
reflective glass. The sticky mirror demonstrates the truth of what phenomenology calls ingenuousness or sincerity.18 Objects are what they are,
in the sense that no matter what we are aware of, or how, there they are,
impossible to shake off. In the midst of irony, there you are, being ironic.
Even mirrors are what they are, no matter what they reflect.19 In its sincerity, reality envelops us like a film of oil. The mirror becomes a substance, an object. Hyperobjects push the reset button on sincerity, just as
Neo discovers that the mirror no longer distances his image from him in
a nice, aesthetically manageable way, but sticks to him.

Figure 4. Trinitite, an entirely new mineral formed by the explosion of the
Gadget, the first nuclear device. Photograph by Shaddack.


36

Viscosity

The more we fight phenomenological sincerity with our reason, the
more glued we figure out we are, which is what it feels like to live in risk
society: a society in which growing scientific awareness of risk (from
toxic chemicals, for instance) changes the nature of democracy itself.20
But it also means that we have exited modernity. The beautiful reversibility of the oily, melting mirror speaks to something that is happening
in a global warming age, precisely because of hyperobjects: the simultaneous dissolution of reality and the overwhelming presence of hyperobjects, which stick to us, which are us. The Greeks called it miasma, the
way bloodguilt sticks to you.21 What Husserl noticed—that objects can’t
be exhausted by perception—has a viscous consequence. There is no
Goldilocks position that’s just right from which to view objects. What
OOO asserts is that one can extend this insight to nonhuman entities. In
a sense, all objects are caught in the sticky goo of viscosity, because they
never ontologically exhaust one another even when they smack headlong into one another. A good example of viscosity would be radioactive
materials. The more you try to get rid of them, the more you realize you
can’t get rid of them. They seriously undermine the notion of “away.” Out
of sight is no longer out of mind, because if you bury them in Yucca
Mountain, you know that they will leach into the water table. And where
will that mountain be 24.1 thousand years from now?
Neo’s melting mirror is a perfect rendition of the phenomenological
sincerity inherent in the Great Acceleration, when we humans find ourselves embedded in earthly reality, not circling above it in geostationary
orbit. This discovery is made precisely through our advanced technology and measuring instruments, not through worn peasant shoes and
back-to-Nature festivals: “By coming to terms with an increasing range
of objects, human beings do not become nihilistic princes of darkness,
but actually the most sincere creatures the earth has ever seen.”22 The fact
that “there is no metalanguage” (according to Lacan) does not mean that
we are forever floating in outer space, but quite the opposite: we are glued
to our phenomenological situation.23
The mirror of science melts and sticks to our hand. The very tools we
were using to objectify things, to cover Earth’s surface with shrink wrap,
become a blowtorch that burns away the glass screen separating humans


Viscosity

37

from Earth, since every measurement is now known as an alteration, as
quantum-scale measurements make clear. Quantum objects are viscous.
Complementarity means that when you nudge a quantum, it sticks to
the nudging device such that you can’t disentangle them. Rather than
dissolving objects into nothingness, quantum theory makes them sticky.
If you stretch this stickiness, how far would it go? At the quantum level,
to measure is just to deflect with a photon or electron (and so forth). Thus
complemenarity ensues, in which what we see is glued to the equipment
that sees it.
Niels Bohr took this to be a warning not to think of quantum phenomena as real, but as correlations to (human) instruments. Instruments
and quanta form a whole that cannot be further analyzed.24 To this extent,
as Bohr puts it, “There is no quantum world.”25 But an equally plausible
view breaks the taboo on ontological interpretations and argues that the
entanglement of equipment and quanta happens because of some deep
further fact about the quantum (or even subquantum) level.26 Likewise,
Einstein’s relativity has been taken to give a green light to relativism. Yet
relativity plausibly frees nonhuman objects from their exclusive tie to
humans, in a blow to anthropocentrism that continues the Copernican
Revolution. The perspective of any human on the universe, whether they
are on Earth or on a starship, is now known for sure to be only one of a
vast plenitude of perspectives based on relative position and velocity.

When I look at the sun gleaming on the solar panels on my roof, I am
watching global warming unfold. Carbon compounds and other molecules in the upper atmosphere magnify the burning intensity of the sun
in the Great Central Valley of California. Yet I do not see global warming
as such. I see this brilliant blade of sunlight, burning the top of my head
as I watch it with half-closed eyes reflecting off the burnished, sapphire
surface of the solar panels. The manifold that I witness is not merely
a “subjective impression,” but is rather just this collusion between sunlight, solar panels, roof, and eyes. Yet global warming is not here. Hyperobjects are nonlocal.
Nuclear radiation is not visible to humans. The nuclear accidents at
Chernobyl and Fukushima bathed beings thousands of miles away in
unseen alpha, beta, and gamma particles, as radioactive specks floated in
air currents across Europe and the Pacific. Days, weeks, months, or years
later, some humans die of radiation sickness. Strange mutagenic flowers
grow.
Likewise, endocrine disruptors penetrate my body through my skin,
my lungs, and my food. The disruptors in pesticides such as Roundup, a
cousin of Agent Orange (also made by Monsanto), often dioxins of some
kind, start cascading reactions in my body, interfering with the production and circulation of hormones. I have no idea what it was that I ate, or
whether it was that field I walked through in Norfolk, England, the air
38

Nonlocality

39

redolent with the potent pungency of pesticide—one could almost see
it glistening on the stalks in the rich arable land of a teenage holiday.
Perhaps it was some other less vividly recalled moment. Yet statistics tell
me, obliquely, never able to point to a direct causal link, that my cancer
may have come from an endocrine disruptor. Hyperobjects seem to
inhabit a Humean causal system in which association, correlation, and
probability are the only things we have to go on, for now. That’s why
it’s so easy for Big Tobacco and global warming deniers: of course there
is no direct proof of a causal link.
Post-Humean causality is by no means a matter of “objective” versus
“subjective” impressions, let alone a matter of human reality versus
nonhuman reality. Rather it’s a matter of different levels of causality. It’s
a matter of how entities manifest for other entities, whether they are
human, or sentient, or not. Nuclear radiation-for the flower turns its
leaves a strange shade of red. Global warming-for the tomato farmer rots
the tomatoes. Plastic-for the bird strangles it as it becomes entangled in
a set of six-pack rings. What we are dealing with here are aesthetic effects
that are directly causal. The octopus of the hyperobject emits a cloud of
ink as it withdraws from access. Yet this cloud of ink is a cloud of effects
and affects. These phenomena are not themselves global warming or
radiation: action at a distance is involved. A gamma particle is a wonderful example of a profound confusion of aisthēsis and praxis, perceiving
and doing. A gamma particle is an ultra-high-frequency photon. In illuminating things, it alters things: flesh, paper, brains.
The subject of gamma rays brings up the source of the title of this
section: quantum theory. Quantum theory is a nonmaterialist theory of
physical substances. Antirealism appropriates quantum theory, since
quantum theory supposedly shows reality is fuzzy or deeply correlated
with perception and so forth. Quantum theory is the only existing
theory to establish firmly that things really do exist beyond our mind
(or any mind). Quantum theory positively guarantees that real objects
exist! Not only that—these objects exist beyond one another. Quantum
theory does this by viewing phenomena as quanta, as discrete “units”
as described in Unit Operations by OOO philosopher Ian Bogost.1
“Units” strongly resemble OOO “objects.”2 Thinking in terms of units


40

Nonlocality

counteracts problematic features of thinking in terms of systems. Consider the so-called black body radiation problem. Classical thermodynamics essentially combines the energy of different waves to figure
out the total energy of a system. The black box in question is a form of
oven. As the temperature in the oven increases, results given by summing the wave states according to classical theory become absurd, tending to infinity.
By seeing the energy in the black box as discrete quanta (“units”),
the correct result is obtained. Max Planck’s discovery of this approach
gave birth to quantum theory. Now consider perception, for the sake of
which antirealism usually cites quantum theory. What does quantum
theory show about our mental interactions with things? Perceptual, sensual phenomena, such as hardness and brilliance, are at bottom quantum
mechanical effects. I can’t put my hand through this table because it is
statistically beyond unlikely that the quanta at the tip of my finger could
penetrate the resistance wells in the quanta on the table’s surface. That’s
what solidity is. It’s an averagely correct experience of an aggregate of
discrete quanta. This statistical quality, far from being a problem, is the
first time humans have been able to formalize supposedly experiential
phenomena such as solidity. What some people find disturbing about
quantum theory (once in a gajillion times I can put my finger through
the table) is precisely evidence for the reality of things.3
Quantum theory specifies that quanta withdraw from one another, including the quanta with which we measure them. In other words, quanta
really are discrete, and one mark of this discreteness is the constant
translation or mistranslation of one quantum by another. Thus, when
you set up quanta to measure the position of a quantum, its momentum
withdraws, and vice versa. Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle states that
when an “observer”—not a subject per se, but a measuring device involving photons or electrons (or whatever)—makes an observation, at least
one aspect of the observed is occluded.4 Observation is as much part
of the universe of objects as the observable, not some ontologically different state (say of a subject). More generally, what Bohr called complementarity ensures that no quantum has total access to any other
quantum. Just as a focusing lens makes one object appear sharper while


Nonlocality

41

others appear blurrier, one quantum variable comes into sharp definition at the expense of others.5 This isn’t about how a human knows an
object, but how a photon interacts with a photosensitive molecule. Some
phenomena are irreducibly undecidable, both wavelike and particle-like.
The way an electron encounters the nucleus of an atom involves a dark
side. Objects withdraw from each other at a profound physical level.
OOO is deeply congruent with the most profound, accurate, and testable
theory of physical reality available. Actually it would be better to say it
the other way around: quantum theory works because it’s object-oriented.
Probing the quantum world is a form of auto-affection: one is using
quanta to explore quanta. Bohr argued that quantum phenomena don’t
simply concatenate themselves with their measuring devices. They’re
identical to them: the equipment and the phenomena form an indivisible whole.6 This “quantum coherence” applies at temperatures close to
absolute zero, where particles become the “same” thing (Bose–Einstein
condensates), or in a very hot plasma (Fermi–Dirac condensates). To an
electron, an ultracold or ultrahot substance may appear transparent, as
if it didn’t exist at all.7 Macroscale objects approximate separate-seeming
entities that in some deeper sense are the same thing. Nanoscale cogwheels get stuck because when tiny things approach one another, Casimir forces glue them together. The cogs become indistinguishable.8 They
no longer function mechanically, as external to one another.9 Nothing
is radically external to anything else: particles don’t clunk onto each
other like little metal balls in an executive’s toy.10 Rough approximations
notwithstanding, reality is not a machine.11 Quantum theory extends the
nonmechanism inherent in relativity theory: “The classical idea of the
separability of the world into distinct but interacting parts is no longer
valid or relevant.”12 Quantum theory is performative too: if it walks and
quacks like an electron, it is one.13 Quantum performativity strongly
resembles evolutionary performativity, commonly called “satisficing”: as
a duck, you just have to look and quack enough like a duck to pass on
your genes.14 What hyperobjects do is make us acknowledge the reality
of what OOO calls execution.
Nonlocality is a technical term in quantum theory. Alain Aspect,
Einstein’s student David Bohm, Anton Zeilinger, and others have shown


42

Nonlocality

that the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox concerning quantum theory
is an empirical fact.15 Einstein, Rosen, and Podolsky argued that if quantum theory were telling us something true about the universe, then
you would be able to entangle particles.16 You can then send one particle some information (make it spin a certain way), and the other(s)
will instantly spin in complementary ways. This works to an arbitrary
distance—that is, whether two yards, two miles or two light years apart.
According to the accepted view, this should fail to happen, since it
implies signals traveling faster than light. Zeilinger has demonstrated
nonlocal phenomena using entangled particles on either side of Vienna,
between two Canary Islands, and between orbiting satellites.17
Unless you want to believe that the speed of light can be violated—
a notion that gives physicists the jitters—you might have to accept that
reality just is nonlocal. Nonlocality deals a crushing blow to the idea
of discrete tiny things floating around in an infinite void, since there is
strictly no “around” in which these things float: one is unable to locate
them in a specific region of spacetime. This void is a remnant of Christian ontology left over from a condemnation by the Bishop of Paris in
1277 (with Pope John XXI’s blessing) of doctrines that limited the power
of God: Thou shalt not imagine that God couldn’t create anything he
likes. God is powerful enough to create an infinite void; therefore, he
did.18 Seventeenth-century science adopted this idea, for no well-workedout reason. In some deep sense there’s no (single, firm, separate) photon
as such. If biology discovers how entangled lifeforms are, quantum entanglement opens a more profound interconnectedness.
Nonlocality means something is profoundly wrong with atomism.19
Moreover, objects have blurred boundaries at scales considerably larger
than we used to think. Photosynthesizing molecules in chloroplasts, the
symbiotic bacteria that make plants green, put photons into coherence.
When a photon enters the molecule the photon occupies many positions
at once.20 Other recent developments have shown nonlocality to operate
in objects as large as molecules and the buckyball-shaped fullerenes.
These objects are huge compared with electrons and photons, about as
huge compared to electrons as you and I are compared with fullerenes.
In early 2010 Aaron O’Connell and other physicists at the University of


Nonlocality

43

California, Santa Barbara, established quantum coherence in an object
visible to the eye: a tiny fork vibrating and not vibrating simultaneously.21 O’Connell and others put the fork thirty microns long into its
ground state by cooling it down to almost absolute zero, then they ran
a phonon—a quantum of vibration—through it. Their naked eyes could
see it vibrating and not vibrating simultaneously, a spectacular and surprising result, from the point of view of the Standard Model of quantum
theory.22 Soon after that, tiny quantum-scale magnets in birds’ eyes were
found to guide birds, not physical electromagnetic fields but rather aesthetic (nonlocal) forms of those fields.23
How might ontology think nonlocality? The Copenhagen Interpretation of quantum theory spearheaded by Bohr holds that though quantum
theory is a powerfully accurate heuristic tool, peering underneath this
tool to see what kind of reality might underlie it would be absurd because
quantum phenomena are “irreducibly inaccessible to us.” Bohr argued
that our measurement is “indivisible” with what is measured.24 Yet the
refusal to get ontological is already ontological: Newtonian atomism, with
its granular view of matter, is left substantially alone. Things were less settled at Copenhagen than the victors’ spin portrayed.25 Bohm, Basil Hiley,
Zeilinger, Antony Valentini, and others proceed along lines established
by De Broglie: an “ontological interpretation” that takes Bohr’s “indivisibility” to pertain to objects beyond (human) cognition.26 Bohm postulated an “implicate order” in which particles are manifestations of some
deeper process, like waves on the ocean.27 Just as ocean waves subside,
particles fold back into the implicate order. “Particles” are abstractions of
a Leibnizian reality in which everything is enfolded in everything else.
The ontological interpretation is bad for holism as well as atomism.
Holism requires some kind of top-level object consisting of parts that
are separate from the whole and hence replaceable: another modulation
of mechanism, holist protestations notwithstanding.28 According to the
Bohmian view, you aren’t part of a larger whole. Everything is enfolded
in everything as “flowing movement.”29 Unlike the Copenhagen Interpretation, the ontological interpretation is noncorrelationist: particles
withdraw from one another, not because humans are observing them in
certain ways, but because the implicate order is withdrawn from itself.


44

Nonlocality

A hyperobject if ever there was one: an auto-affective ocean that lives between the size of an electron (10-17 cm) and the Planck length (10 -33 cm).
This whole might be strictly unanalyzable: the implicate order has an
irreducible dark side because it’s made of rotations within rotations, or
as Harman puts it, “objects wrapped in objects wrapped in objects.”30
Implication and explication suggest substances we think of as “matter” being enfolded and unfolded from something deeper. Even if it
were the case that OOO should defer to physics, in the terms set by
physics itself objects aren’t made “of ” any one thing in particular. Just as
there is no top level, there may be no bottom level that is not a substantial, formed object. Electrons come and go, change into other particles,
radiate energy. An electron is real. Yet in the act of becoming or unbecoming an electron, it’s a statistical performance: “Quantum theory
requires us to give up the idea that the electron, or any other object has,
by itself, any intrinsic properties at all. Instead, each object should be
regarded as something containing only incompletely defined potentialities that are developed when an object interacts with an appropriate system.”31 To argue thus approaches Harman’s image of the withdrawn-ness
of objects as a “subterranean creature.”32 Thus, the “something deeper”
from which the electron unfolds is also withdrawn.
If they lack such a hidden essence, objects must be spatially external
to one another like machine parts. A view such as this legitimates instrumentalization, which reduces objects to other objects. Objects would
relate externally. Yet we can’t predict the future state of reality even in
principle, because we can’t anticipate the position of every particle. It is
impossible not only because this would take too long (it would) or break
the speed of light, not only because of complementarity, but for a more
fundamental reason, having nothing to do with epistemology or correlationism: there are no particles as such, no matter as such, only discretely quantized objects.33 If this is the case at the most fine-grained
level we currently know, then it will be much more so at higher scales,
the scales on which evolution, biology, and ecology happen.
At the quantum level, genuine nonlocality operates: two entangled photons, two entangled electrons can indeed appear to influence one another
at a distance. Einstein found precisely this aspect highly disturbing: he


Nonlocality

45

called it “spooky action at a distance.”34 The influence appears to be
simultaneous: in other words, it could be faster than light. Since we now
know that even a single photon obeys the speed of light, the supposed
information transfer is indeed spooky. Something like telepathy or backward-in-time causation may be necessary to allow us to continue to
cleave to the ontology of discrete particles.35
If there is indeed a physical basis for nonlocality—a subquantum level
of which what appear to be two particles are simply the peaks of ripples—
then this level is a hyperobject.36 Below 10-17 cm, the size of an electron,
there is as much a difference in size as one approaching the Planck length
of 10-33 cm as there is between you and an electron. What might be down
there? Is it really just nothing at all, just pure relationships? Such a hyperobject would be massively distributed “in” time and space in the most
radical sense. Actually, “in” is not quite accurate. Since on this view time
and space are only emergent properties of objects larger than some threshold size, the hypothetical subquantum hyperobject is “everywhere.”37 Yet
I do not wish to suggest that true nonlocality applies to all hyperobjects.
The action at a distance that hyperobjects manifest is nonlocal, but not
in the quantum sense.
There are two ways to think about this more carefully, however. The
first approach is to consider the way in which entities that are nowhere
nearly as small as traditional quanta such as electrons seem to exhibit
nonlocality. As we saw, nonlocal effects have now been observed in
objects considerably larger than traditional quanta: buckyball-shaped
fullerenes; certain configurations of carbon engineered by nanotechnology; and a tiny metal fork thirty microns long, placed in a state of quantum superposition and seen with the naked eye to “breathe,” vibrating
and not vibrating at the same time.38 Photons entering the photosynthesizing molecules in a chloroplast go into superposition—such molecules
are galaxy-scale objects relative to regular quanta.39 Again, a bird detects
the quantum signature of an electromagnetic wave, not the wave itself,
by means of a quantum scale magnet in its eye. Birds perceive not some
traditional material lump, but an aesthetic shape.
Quantum objects are massively distributed both in a conventional (yet
still extraordinary) sense, and in a highly unconventional sense. First,


46

Nonlocality

the roughly conventional. On De Broglie’s view a wave packet is a blob
that contains something like a particle, distributed in the wave packet
across a range of locations according to probability. The wave packet
may be imagined as distributed across a vast area of spacetime. Some
physicists use the Solar System as a good enough reference point: the
elusive electron is bound to be found somewhere in there. This sounds
like a joke but it isn’t—it’s how Bohm shows undergraduates how to solve
for the location of a particle in his textbook on quantum theory.
And now for the unconventional explanation. To say the least, quantum nonlocality seriously forces us to rewrite our ideas of matter and of
materialism. Nonlocality is precisely a theory of textuality at the quantum level, in which information is dispersed among particles seemingly
occupying different regions of spacetime. If I say reality qua me and you
and this essay doesn’t really exist, am I a nihilistic postmodernist or a
New Ager in academic drag? Yet my colleague in the physics building gets
away with asserting that the universe must be a hologram projected from
an inscribed surface inside a black hole—that the extent to which we exist
is not unlike the extent to which the image on your credit card exists.
Bohm uses the analogy of a hologram to describe the “immense ocean
of cosmic energy” from which seeming particles are explicated.40 Images
“captured” with a lens conjure single, solid, independent-seeming things.
A hologram can’t be seen directly, but is a mesh of interference patterns
created by light waves bouncing off the object and light waves passing
through a beam splitter. When you pass light through the interference
pattern, a three-dimensional rendering of the object appears in front of
the pattern. Cut a little piece of hologram out, or shine light through a
little piece of it (same thing), and you still see a (slightly more blurry)
version of the whole object. Every piece of the hologram contains information about the whole.
The quantum real is a play of difference within which particle-like
phenomena arise, just as for deconstruction language is a play of difference out of which meaning arises. A hologram is a form of writing.41 A
holographic universe explains nonlocality. Gravity wave detectors reveal
suspiciously regular patterns emanating from the cosmic background
radiation, as if at some level reality were pixelated—made of regular little


Nonlocality

47

“dots” of information: the regularity you’d expect if reality were indeed a
projection of an actual hologram.42 A holographic universe would be a
hyperobject—massively distributed in time and space, exhibiting nonlocal effects that defied location and temporality, cuttable into many
parts without losing coherence.
To those great Victorian period discoveries, then—evolution, capital,
the unconscious—we must now add spacetime, ecological interconnection, and nonlocality. These discoveries all share something insofar
as they humiliate the human, decisively decentering us from a place
of pampered privilege in the scheme of things. Nonlocality is perhaps
the most drastic of all of these, since it implies that the notion of being
located at all is only epiphenomenal to a deeper, atemporal implicate
order.
Let us now consider very large objects in this light. The intrinsic inconsistency in objects that nonlocality implies—the tiny fork can vibrate
and not vibrate at once—will become very significant as we proceed with
hyperobjects. Although this is not clear right now, by the end of this section it should become evident that hyperobjects are contradictory beasts.
Moreover, the aesthetic-causal realm in which hyperobjects appear to
operate is in some sense nonlocal and atemporal. Or at any rate, such
gigantic scales are involved—or rather such knotty relationships between
gigantic and intimate scales—that hyperobjects cannot be thought as
occupying a series of now-points “in” time or space. They confound the
social and psychic instruments we use to measure them—even digital
devices have trouble. Global warming requires tremendous computing
power to model in a realistic way.
Nonlocality means just that—there is no such thing, at a deep level, as
the local. Locality is an abstraction. Metaphorically this applies to hyperobjects. The wet stuff falling on my head in Northern California in early
2011 could have been an effect of the tsunami churning up La Niña in
the Pacific and dumping it on the land, La Niña being a manifestation
of global warming in any case. The Japan earthquake of 2011 was also
plausibly a manifestation of global warming, since changing temperatures in the ocean change the pressure on the Earth’s crust. Heavy rain is
simply a local manifestation of some vast entity that I’m unable directly


48

Nonlocality

to see. Thus, the right-wing talking heads are quite correct to be afraid of
global warming. It means something ontologically scary about our world.
It means that not only is everything interconnected—a fatal blow to individualists everywhere—but also that the “I refute it thus” stone-kicking
that we’ve come to expect from reactionaries no longer works.43 The
“Well it’s snowing in Boise, Idaho, so global warming is a crock” meme
is a desperate attempt to put this ontological genie back in its bottle.
Stop the tape of evolution anywhere and you won’t see it. Stand under
a rain cloud and it’s not global warming you’ll feel. Cut your coat into
a thousand pieces—you won’t find capital in there. Now try pointing
to the unconscious. Did you catch it? Hyperobjects compel us to think
ecologically, and not the other way around. It’s not as if some abstract
environmental system made us think like this; rather, plutonium, global
warming, pollution, and so on, gave rise to ecological thinking. To think
otherwise is to confuse the map with the territory. For sure, the idea
of hyperobjects arose because of quantum-theoretical thinking about
the nuclei of atoms and electron orbits (nuclear bombs), and because
of systems-theoretical approaches to emergent properties of massive
amounts of weather data, and so on. Yet hyperobjects are not the data:
they are hyperobjects.
When you feel raindrops, you are experiencing climate, in some
sense. In particular you are experiencing the climate change known as
global warming. But you are never directly experiencing global warming
as such. Nowhere in the long list of catastrophic weather events—which
will increase as global warming takes off—will you find global warming.
But global warming is as real as this sentence. Not only that, it’s viscous.
It never stops sticking to you, no matter where you move on Earth. How
can we account for this? By arguing that global warming, like all hyperobjects, is nonlocal: it’s massively distributed in time and space. What
does this mean? It means that my experience of the weather in the hic
et nunc is a false immediacy. It’s never the case that those raindrops only
fall on my head! They are always a manifestation of global warming! In
an age of ecological emergency—in an age in which hyperobjects start
to oppress us with their terrifying strangeness—we will have acclimatize
ourselves to the fact that locality is always a false immediacy. When you


Nonlocality

49

see a Magic Eye picture, you realize that all the little squiggles that you
thought were individual squiggles are actually distributed pieces of a
higher-dimensional object that seems to emerge when you do that crossing-your-eyes thing. In a Magic Eye picture, the cup or flower is distributed throughout the mesh of fuzzy little patches of the image. The object
is already there. Before we look at it. Global warming is not a function of
our measuring devices. Yet because it’s distributed across the biosphere
and beyond, it’s very hard to see as a unique entity. And yet, there it
is, raining on us, burning down on us, quaking the Earth, spawning
gigantic hurricanes. Global warming is an object of which many things
are distributed pieces: the raindrops falling on my head in Northern California. The tsunami that pours through the streets of Japanese towns.
The increasing earthquake activity based on changing pressure on the
ocean floor. Like the image in a Magic Eye picture, global warming is
real, but it involves a massive, counterintuitive perspective shift to see it.
Convincing some people of its existence is like convincing some twodimensional Flatland people of the existence of apples, based on the
appearance of a morphing circular shape in their world.
The book Hiroshima is a series of testimonies by people in the town
when the bomb was dropped.44 Each witness gives a unique account of
the bomb. No single witness experiences the entire bomb. No witness
was too close to the bomb: otherwise they would have been evaporated,
or quickly incinerated, or blown to pieces. There is a core of human
silence around which the witnesses give their testimony. Each testimony
is a local manifestation (Bryant’s term) of the bomb. Some witnesses
assume that they are very close to a powerful conventional bomb, when
they are relatively far away from the first nuclear bomb. Each story is told
in a narrative present that is necessarily different from the moment at
which the bomb hit. The constraints of human physicality and memory
displace the bomb. It becomes distant and close at the same time and for
the same reasons. Possibly the most uncanny aspect of the bomb is the
energy flash that the witnesses experienced as a silent, sudden bathing
of everything in light so intense that they couldn’t quite see. Light ceases
to be a neutral, transparent medium in which everything is illuminated,
and becomes a potent force:


50

Nonlocality

With the blood specimen in his left hand, walking in a kind of distraction
he had felt all morning, probably because of the dream and his restless
night, [Doctor Terufumi Sasaki] started along the main corridor on his
way toward the stairs. He was one step beyond an open window when the
light of the bomb was reflected, like a gigantic photographic flash, in the
corridor. He ducked down on one knee and said to himself . . . “Sasaki,
gamare! Be brave!” Just then (the building was 1,650 yards from the center), the blast ripped through the hospital. The glasses he was wearing flew
off his face; the bottle of blood crashed against one wall; his Japanese slippers zipped out from under his feet—but otherwise, thanks to where he
stood, he was untouched.45

The disorientation of scale—from “blood specimen” to “the blast ripp[ing]
through the hospital”—and of physicality—from slippers to energy flash—
is immense. Doctor Sasaki does not see the bomb directly: instead, he
sees it “reflected . . . in the corridor.” Like Steven Spielberg’s version of
J. G. Ballard’s Jim, he sees the bomb as a photographic flash. The bomb
is nonlocal, elsewhere, even as “the blast ripped through the hospital.” As
Jim says, “I learned a new word today. Atom bomb. It was like a white
light in the sky. Like God taking a photograph.”46 The very pinnacle of
modernity, encapsulated in Robert Oppenheimer’s “I am become death,
shatterer of worlds,” is the arrival of what Heidegger would have called
the last god, if he had been able to include nonhumans in his view.47 Heidegger was unable to ascertain how this last god would manifest in the
very core of technological enframing.48 Like God taking a photograph,
the nonhuman sees us, in the white light of its fireball, hotter than the
sun. Like God, yet unlike a scholastic causa sui inhabiting a beyond:
rather the prose reminds us that we are dealing with a physical entity. Yet
this is a weird physical entity, with all the fateful force of that term. To
what are we tuning when we attune to the hyperobject? Is this uncertainty not precisely what we are heeding? Isn’t it the case that the effect
delivered to us in the rain, the weird cyclone, the oil slick, is something
uncanny?
The most poignant aspect of the stories is how they begin to mesh
with the present time of narration. Each storyteller gradually brings her


Nonlocality

51

story up to date, slowly showing us how the bomb affected her entire life
from that moment on. With increasing distance from the event of the
explosion, the reality of the hyperobject looms ever larger. It is like the
episode in Wordsworth’s autobiographical poem The Prelude, in which
the boy Wordsworth steals a boat.49 As he rows away from a mountain,
it seems for a while to loom ever larger in his field of vision, as if it were
pursuing him, due to a strange parallax effect in which more of a suitably
massive object is revealed as one goes farther away from it. This event is
surely a good example of what the previous section calls viscosity. It is
as if the mountain is stuck to Wordsworth, as if it won’t let him go. Then
the recounting of the episode in the long narrative of The Prelude shows
how the mountain still haunts him. The moment was what Wordsworth
calls a spot of time, a traumatic rupture in the continuity of his being, a
wound around which his psyche secreted memories, fantasies, thoughts.
The self, in this respect, is nothing more than the history of such wounds
and the secretions we exuded to protect ourselves from them. Freud
puts it this way: the ego is the “precipitate of abandoned object cathexes,”
like a mystic writing pad whose underlying wax is inscribed with everything that was ever drawn on it.50 The ego is a poem about strangers: the
blow of a hand, an abandonment, the hardness of a bed, the warmth of
a teddy bear.
How much more is this the case with an object that leaves its alpha,
beta, and gamma particle traces in your flesh, traces that alter your DNA
for decades. This cannot be dismissed as merely a mental experience
(though it is still an aesthetic one, in the strict sense that aesthetics has
to do with the way one object impinges on another one), and similarly,
we shouldn’t dismiss Wordsworth’s experience as merely mental. As we
shall see in the section “Interobjectivity,” this is far from a trivial matter
of “mere” sensation, but has to do with causality as such. The parallax
effect that spooks the young Wordsworth is far more true to something
real than he supposed. In a sense, we can expect human egos to be pockmarked with the traces of hyperobjects. We are all burnt by ultraviolet
rays. We all contain water in about the same ratio as Earth does, and salt
water in the same ratio that the oceans do. We are poems about the
hyperobject Earth.


52

Nonlocality

It is clear that DNA has sometimes “learned” to cope with hyperobjects. Extremophiles such as the bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans suggest the possibility that life and its building blocks (amino acids) arose in
conditions that would seem inhospitable to most contemporary lifeforms: on comets, on the surface of ancient Mars, in hot deep rocks, deep
within ice, or in boiling undersea vents. Deinococcus radiodurans is a startling record of “abandoned object cathexes,” encounters with extremes of
heat, pressure, and radiation, and with genotoxic chemicals and dehydration. It is a poem about hyperobjects. For this reason, the bacterium
is now being engineered to cope with human-made hyperobjects such as
mercury spills.
What interests me here is not so much an answer to the question of
exactly how lifeforms arose, but the fact that lifeforms themselves are
poems about nonlife, in particular highly dangerous entities that could
destroy life. Freud argued that the death drive was precisely the attempt
to ward off death, to bind stimulation. I have argued that the death drive
predates life as such, literally rather than merely figuratively as some psychoanalytic philosophers hold. RNA and the silicate replicators that it
attached to in the preliving “RNA World” were molecules that were profoundly out of balance, resembling the liar paradox: “This sentence is
false.” Replication is just the attempt of such a molecule to “solve” the paradox inscribed within it, and thus to cancel out the disequilibrium, somewhat in the way that water “finds its own level.”51 Yet the very attempt
to find a solution—to erase the stain of itself from existence—is what
results in its continued existence as a copy of itself. In trying to cancel
itself out, the replicator becomes beautifully defended against its environment. Our existence is due to more than a little bit of death, the headlong rush toward equilibrium.
As poems about the shocks that flesh is heir to, lifeforms incorporate
and exclude deadly substances. Or better, lifeforms both include and
exclude death, in the very same way that a poem is always talking about
the paper it is written on and never talking about it. Thus, the Archean
(ancient) Earth was awash with cyanide. Yet the very chemical reactions
that cyanide induces that can kill lifeforms are also capable, for the very
same reasons, of giving rise to complex carbon compounds, the basic


Nonlocality

53

elements of amino acids. In a further twist, it’s possible that the plentiful
cyanide on Earth resulted from reactions that happened when comets
rushed through Earth’s atmosphere, adding an extraterrestrial level of
trauma, specifically geotrauma.52 Certainly a trauma involving hyperobjects. Negarestani imagines the oil under our feet to be what I here
call a hyperobject, “an omnipresent planetary entity”: a vastly distributed
agent with dark designs of its own, co-responsible for turning the surface
into a desert, as if it were the prophet of some sinister mystical version
of Islam.53 Negarestani writes, “Petroleum poisons Capital with absolute madness,” since it is not really on the side of humans, but is rather
“an autonomous chemical weapon belonging to earth as . . . a sentient
entity.”54 As one progresses deeper into Cyclonopedia (which is part novel,
part nonfiction, and part philosophy, and is infused with a sinister intensity), Negarestani’s delirious prose begins to look like the upsurge of oil
itself, which he imagines as “the Nether Blob. An anorganically synthesized material seething up from the primal interstellar bacterial colonies existing in the bowels of the Earth (from Thomas Gold’s theory of
the Deep Hot Biosphere).”55 Negarestani’s text is a demonic parody of
Nature writing, taking quite literally the idea that nonhumans are dictating the script.
Hiroshima and extremophiles and RNA tell us about the properties of
art in general, and thus about causality. Art sends us information from
another place. Snow falls in a poem, but it is not really falling.56 Readers
wonder about the intention of a ghostly author whom they think they
see behind or within the poem.57 Painters of paintings live in a society: perhaps the paintings are distorted records of the way that society
organized its enjoyment—otherwise known as economics. Or maybe the
music we are hearing tells us about the unconscious, coming from some
place of archetypes or from the trauma of unspeakable secrets. Here is
the poem. But the poem is not here.
Is the beyond that might explain the poem more real than the here of
the poem? There is no way to tell. Like any stranger, the poem is caught
between worlds, in an interstitial place that makes worlds as such seem
flimsy and constructed—which, of course, they are. The viscous melting
mirror takes Neo to a place in between worlds: the world of the Matrix


54

Nonlocality

and the world of the machines. The viscous coffee plops out of the cup
in the Black Lodge in Twin Peaks. These zones are not really “between
worlds,” since there is nothing between which they exist. All of reality is
a bardo, a “between” as Tibetan Buddhism puts it, or rather a series of
bardos. Karma, namely the collected tendencies and habits that things
run into, is what fuels the bardos. These bardos are simply the relationships between entities. Hyperobjects forces us to experience the bardos.
In some sense, our cognition is “an insect’s waking dream.”58 Such is
the force of the hyperobject evolution. In some sense, modernity is the
story of how oil got into everything. Such is the force of the hyperobject
oil. In some sense, cancer is the physical body’s expression of radioactive
materials. Such is the force of the hyperobject radiation. In some sense,
everything changes. Such is the force of the hyperobject universe. Yet the
converse is also true. From the standpoint of the end of the universe,
everything is equally meaningless, smoothed out into maximum entropy.
Yet this massive object is not more real than a safety pin or a snail shell.
From the standpoint of radiation, soft tissues are invisible. Yet from my
point of view, they are the painful seeping lesions on my back as I recover
from sunstroke, glued by lymph to the pillow in a Maltese villa. From
oil’s point of view, my car is a shallow doll’s house thimble. Yet from my
point of view, oil makes America look the way it does: it covers the plains
with highways while weeds grow through the rotting wood on a railway
track. From evolution’s point of view, I’m just an ephemeral expression
of DNA. Yet from my point of view, I inhabit an extended phenotype that
consists of computers, desks, lights, streets, children, and dinner plates.
When I think nonlocality in this way, I am not negating the specificity of things, evaporating them into the abstract mist of the general or
the larger or the less local. Nonlocality is far weirder than that. When
it comes to hyperobjects, nonlocality means that the general itself is
compromised by the particular. When I look for the hyperobject oil,
I don’t find it. Oil just is droplets, flows, rivers, and slicks of oil. I do not
find the object by looking sub specie aeternitatis, but by seeing things sub
specie majoris, sub specie inhumanae. This brings us to our next section,
in which we try to bring the hyperobject into an even sharper focus, by
considering temporality.

When you approach an object, more and more objects emerge. It’s like
being in a dream written by Zeno. Hyperobjects envelop us, yet they
are so massively distributed in time that they seem to taper off, like a
long street stretched into the distance. Time bends them and flattens
them, the same way that an electromagnetic wave front shortens at its
leading edge. Because we can’t see to the end of them, hyperobjects are
necessarily uncanny. Like the empty streets and open doorways in the
paintings of Giorgio de Chirico, hyperobjects seem to beckon us further
into themselves, making us realize that we’re already lost inside them.
The recognition of being caught in hyperobjects is precisely a feeling of
strange familiarity and familiar strangeness. We already know the weather
like the back of our hand. But this is weird weather, this global warming
weather. We already know light. But this is weird light, this radiation.
Bryant describes it thus:
Hyperobjects are thus like our experience of a pool while swimming.
Everywhere we are submersed within the pool, everywhere the cool water
caresses our body as we move through it, yet we are nonetheless independent of the water. We produce effects in the water like diffraction patterns,
causing it to ripple in particular ways, and it produces effects in us, causing
our skin to get goosebumps.1

55

56

Temporal Undulation

Space can no longer be construed as an absolute container, but rather
should be thought of as a spacetime manifold that is radically in the universe, of it rather than ontologically outside it.
Das Rad (The Wheel) is a comical German cartoon about two rocks
that witness the rise and fall of humans.2 Time is sped up to accommodate the much vaster timescale of the rocks, who speak laconically
about what seems to be going on around them. Das Rad exists in the
context of human awareness of deep time and of the dangerous futures
we have unleashed. Occasionally time slows to accommodate the temporal perspective, as when a little boy seemingly invents the wheel, to
appropriately Straussian background music. Yet this invention is anticipated by one of the rocks themselves, who idly spins the wheel-rock—
initially it’s just a segment of his body—thus setting it up for the boy’s
inspection. Human technology, which Heidegger blames for its uncanny
enframing of reality, is placed back into a larger contexture of equipment
that includes rocks and their toys, in a flat ontology in which rocks and
humans aren’t all that different (Figure 5).
Felix Hess’s Air Pressure Fluctuations is a sound art piece that employs
a massively accelerated time, enabling us to hear sounds that are not
usually accessible. Hess puts contact mikes on the window of his apartment in New York. They can record sounds for five days and nights.
Then he speeds up the recording by 360 times. Traffic begins to sound
like the tinkling of tiny insects. A slow, periodic hum begins to become
audible. When I hear Air Pressure Fluctuations, I am hearing the standing wave caused by pressure changes in the air over the Atlantic Ocean.
I am hearing the sound of the air over the Atlantic. A gigantic entity has
been channeled into a sound recording audible to humans.3
Harman writes that, because objects withdraw irreducibly, you can’t
even get closer to objects.4 This becomes clearer as we enter the ecological crisis—“Has it started yet? How far in are we?” This anxiety is a
symptom of the emergence of hyperobjects. It’s like trying to get closer
to the moon by running toward it, all the while forgetting that you are
on the surface of the earth. The more data we have about lifeforms, the
more we realize we can never truly know them. This has partly to do
with something strange that has happened to temporality. The ocean of


Figure 5. Tom Gauld, Two Rocks Converse (2010). This and the German cartoon
Das Rad (The Wheel) comically show the temporal scale at which geological change
occurs, and the ways in which this temporality intersects with human temporality,
and indeed human agency. One of the rocks in Das Rad plays with something
that a human child “discovers” as a wheel. Copyright Tom Gauld. Reproduced by
permission.


58

Temporal Undulation

floating temporality and spatiality wafts to and fro, “in front of things”:
not spatially in front, but ontologically in front, like the undulating red
curtain of a theater.
The Florida Everglades have lasted for about five thousand years. Some
call them Nature because that is what they are used to. But beyond this,
they are a hyperobject, massively distributed in time and space in ways
that baffle humans and make interacting with them fascinating, disturbing, problematic, and wondrous. Joel Trexler is an ecologist who’s totally
at home out on the Everglades. This at-homeness is palpable in the way
he scoops up a carnivorous plant, bladderwort, or in his excitement about
the gar, a living fossil: so many things that are hard to spectate or to photograph but are nevertheless compelling to think about. Trexler argues
that it’s possible to restore the Everglades to a condition they had fifty, one
hundred, or one thousand years ago. There is no “pristine,” no Nature,
only history. Indeed, as Adorno puts it, Nature is simply reified history.5
I start the engine of my car. Liquefied dinosaur bones burst into flame.
I walk up a chalky hill. Billions of ancient pulverized undersea creatures
grip my shoes. I breathe. Bacterial pollution from some Archean cataclysm fills my alveoli—we call it oxygen. I type this sentence. Mitochondria, anaerobic bacteria hiding in my cells from the Oxygen Catastrophe,
spur me with energy. They have their own DNA. I hammer a nail. In consistent layers of ore, bacteria deposited the iron in Earth’s crust. I turn
on the TV and see snow. A sliver of the snow is a trace of the Cosmic
Microwave Background left over from the Big Bang. I walk on top of lifeforms. The oxygen in our lungs is bacterial outgassing. Oil is the result
of some dark, secret collusion between rocks and algae and plankton
millions and millions of years in the past. When you look at oil you’re
looking at the past. Hyperobjects are time-stretched to such a vast extent
that they become almost impossible to hold in mind.
I look at a temperature chart derived from the Godard Institute for
Space Studies (Figure 1). It shows me one century of global warming, an
upward zigzag. I read that 75 percent of global warming effects will persist
until five hundred years from now. I try to imagine what life was like in
1513. Thirty thousand years from now, ocean currents will have absorbed
more of the carbon compounds, but 25 percent will still hang around in


Temporal Undulation

59

the atmosphere. The half-life of plutonium-239 is 24,100 years. These
periods are as long as all of visible human history thus far. The paintings
in the Chauvet Cave in France date back thirty thousand years (Figure
6). But 7 percent of global warming effects will still be occurring one
hundred thousand years from now as igneous rocks slowly absorb the
last of the greenhouse gases.6 I have decided to call these timescales
the horrifying, the terrifying, and the petrifying. The last is particularly
appropriate given that all that will remain of human beings in the flesh

Figure 6. Replica of the paintings in the Chauvet Cave. It is difficult to project
one’s imagination back as far as this earliest known example of human art, as it also
is to project one’s imagination forwards to the end of the half-life of plutonium-239
(24, 100 years).


60

Temporal Undulation

one hundred thousand years from now may indeed be fossils; and that
the new “minerals” such as concrete, created with extreme rapidity by
humans (we have doubled the number of such minerals on Earth), form
built structures (skyscrapers, overpasses, garnets for lasers, graphene,
bricks) that will indeed be a layer of geological strata at that point; not
to mention the “mineraloids” such as glasses and ceramics, and materials
such as plastics. The timescale is a Medusa that turns us to stone. We
know this now, just as we know that we have changed the future fossils
of Earth. The future hollows out the present.
These gigantic timescales are truly humiliating in the sense that they
force us to realize how close to Earth we are. Infinity is far easier to cope
with. Infinity brings to mind our cognitive powers, which is why for
Kant the mathematical sublime is the realization that infinity is an uncountably vast magnitude beyond magnitude.7 But hyperobjects are not
forever. What they offer instead is very large finitude.8 I can think infinity. But I can’t count up to one hundred thousand. I have written one
hundred thousand words, in fits and starts. But one hundred thousand
years? It’s unimaginably vast. Yet there it is, staring me in the face, as the
hyperobject global warming. And I helped cause it. I am directly responsible for beings that far into the future, insofar as two things will be true
simultaneously: no one then will meaningfully be related to me; and
my smallest action now will affect that time in profound ways. A Styrofoam cup will outlive me by over four hundred years. The plastic bag in
Ramin Bahrani’s movie (in the voice of Werner Herzog) wishes to talk to
the woman it knows as its maker, the woman who used it to carry her
groceries: “If I could meet my maker, I would tell her just one thing: I
wish that she had created me so that I could die.”9 To hear a plastic bag
wish such a thing is profoundly different from thinking abstract infinity.
There is a real sense in which it is far easier to conceive of “forever” than
very large finitude. Forever makes you feel important. One hundred
thousand years makes you wonder whether you can imagine one hundred thousand anything. It seems rather abstract to imagine that a book
is one hundred thousand words long.
The philosophy of vast space was first opened up by Catholicism, which
made it a sin not to suppose that God had created an infinite void.10


Temporal Undulation

61

Along with the scholastic view of substances, Descartes inherited this
void and Pascal wrote that its silence filled him with dread.11 Vast nonhuman temporal and spatial magnitudes have been physically near
humans since the Romantic period, when Mary Anning discovered the
first dinosaur fossil (in 1811) and natural historians reckoned the age
of Earth. Yet it was not until Einstein that space and time themselves
were seen as emergent properties of objects. The Einsteinian view is
what finally gave us the conceptual tools to conceptualize the scope of
very large finitude.
Einstein’s discovery of spacetime was the discovery of a hyperobject—
the way in which mass as such grips space, distorts it from within,
stretching space and time into whorls and vortices. For Einstein, entities—which may or may not include living observers—comprise indivisible “world tubes.” By world tube, relativity theory means to include the
apprehending aspect of an entity with its entitive aspect. A world tube is
a hyperobject. That is, world tubes stretch and snap our ideas of what an
object is in the first place. Each world tube encounters a fundamentally
different universe depending on its mass and velocity. World tubes recede
from other world tubes in an inescapable and irreducible way. There are
two main reasons for this.
(1) Light rays bouncing off an object only exert an influence within what
Hermann Minkowski (the mathematician who proved relativity
theory geometrically) calls the light cone. There is an absolute past
and an absolute future relative to any reference frame, a concept that
approaches Derrida’s idea of l’avenir.12 Relativity limits prediction to
the light cone. For every object in the universe there is a genuinely
future future that is radically unknowable. There is a genuinely
elsewhere elsewhere that is radically unknowable. Yet the future
future and the elsewhere elsewhere exist. They are, in my
terminology, strange strangers, knowable yet uncanny. We will
reinvestigate this topic shortly.
(2) When we examine a world tube up close, it has all kinds of strange
properties. Because time ripples and melts along its surface, sensual
interactions between one tube and another are always melting and


62

Temporal Undulation

dripping rather than being rigid and uniform. Thus, time or space
aren’t physically real; rather physical events are real and they contain
time and space in their interior—an argument of Einstein’s that
Harman does in another way.13 Only infinitesimally small areas
of space-time may be regarded as Galilean—that is, as rigid and
container-like.14

The Einsteinian object isn’t a unity. Thus, “it is not possible in relativity to obtain a consistent definition of an extended rigid body, because
this would imply signals faster than light.”15 That means the pencil you
are holding in your fingers is only a rigid extended body on account of
a false immediacy. Nothing in the universe apprehends the pencil like
that, really. Not even the pencil apprehends itself like that. The physical
universe consists of objects that are more like turbulence in a stream
than (gooey or hard) extended bodies.16 A “world tube,” with its irreducible past and future, is a withdrawn object. Relativity guarantees that
real objects will be forever withdrawn from any object that tries to access
them, including those objects themselves. General relativity gives us the
most obviously withdrawn object of all—the black hole.
Molten, Gaussian temporality ceases simply to be an analogy when
you’re thinking about some hyperobjects such as planets, which really
do have time melting and rippling along their surfaces and out into space
through their gravitational field. Of course relativity applies equally to a
pencil or to your feet, it’s just that the effects are negligible at small scales.
But hyperobjects are long-lasting enough and huge enough for genuine
relativistic effects to manifest.
The totality of the Einsteinian universe is like a stream filled with
countless vortices of energy. It only makes a relative sense to differentiate
one vortex from another, so that the significance of such an object
changes depending on circumstances. This is much more strange than
saying that you can read an object any way you like, that you can walk
around a single, solid-seeming object and view it just how you like. Power
is on the side of the object apprehended, not on the side of the apprehending thing (whether it’s us or a pencil or a reverse thruster). What we
have is the inverse of perspectivism, a world of compulsion, in which


Temporal Undulation

63

world tubes draw us into their gravity wells. Rippling with time, objects
tease other objects into their sphere of influence, their “level,” as Lingis
puts it.17 They exercise all kinds of imperatives on the sensitivities of
apprehending objects, such as human nervous systems, antennae, and
tape heads.
Spacetime turns from a grid-like box into what Einstein fantastically
calls a “reference-mollusk.” Reference mollusks exist precisely because of
hyperobjects that emanate gravitational fields. In these fields geometry
is not Euclidean.18 In the absence of graphics software that could morph
and stretch a grid to convey Gaussian, non-Euclidean coordinates, a
squishy shellfish was the best Einstein could come up with. But in a sense
the mollusk is just right. Time and space emerge from things, like the
rippling flesh of a sea urchin or octopus. The flesh emerges from the
gyrations of DNA and RNA molecules, struggling to solve their inherent
inconsistency, and ending up repeating themselves in the process. Likewise time blossoms from what I shall call the Rift between the appearance and the essence of a thing.19
Thinking time this way is a profound post-Kantian shift, to which we
are only beginning to catch up. It’s a false cliché that we have grasped the
meaning of relativity. Far from it. In our daily social and psychic practices, we are still Newtonians, still in awe of infinite space, and behind
that in awe of the infinite God of infinite space. At most we see infinity
and space as transcendental categories, as Kant does. Ironically, space
and time are the two things that Kant allows most to be like “objects”
in the OOO sense, autonomous quanta that can’t be divided further.
Kant’s spuriously “Copernican” turn was more like a Ptolemaic counterrevolution, as Meillassoux has pointed out.20 It’s Einstein who continues
the Copernican legacy, by showing how time and space emerge from
objects, not from synthetic judgments that preunderstand being to be
thus and so.
The undulating fronds of space and time float in front of objects.
Some speculative realism maintains there is an abyss, an Ungrund (unground) deeper than thought, deeper than matter, a surging vortex of
dynamism.21 To understand hyperobjects, however, is to think the abyss
in front of things. When I reach out to mop my sweating brow on a hot


64

Temporal Undulation

day, the California sun beating down through the magnifying lens of
global warming, I plunge my hand into a fathomless abyss. When I pick
a blackberry from a bush, I fall into an abyss of phenotypes, my very act
of reaching being an expression of the genome that is not exclusively
mine, or exclusively human, or even exclusively alive. In the following
section on how hyperobjects are phased, we shall explore in more detail
the abyss that floats in front of objects.
Hyperobjects are Gaussian, disturbingly squishy and mollusk-like. The
undulations of the mollusk flesh of spacetime fail to drop to zero. Gravity waves from the “beginning of time” are right now passing through my
body from the edge of the universe. It is as if we were inside a gigantic
octopus. H. P. Lovecraft imagines the insane god Cthulhu this way.22
Cthulhu inhabits a non-Euclidean city, just like Gaussian spacetime. By
understanding hyperobjects, human thinking has summoned Cthulhulike entities into social, psychic, and philosophical space. The contemporary philosophical obsession with the monstrous provides a refreshing
exit from human-scale thoughts. It is extremely healthy to know not
only that there are monstrous beings, but that there are beings that are
not purely thinkable, whose being is not directly correlated with whatever thinking is. It’s what Meillassoux calls le grand dehors, though the
queer ecologist in me has a pang of dislike when I see this translated
as “the great outdoors.”23 I fear another assault on the “introverted” and
the “perverse.” I am happier with the idea that this outdoors is already
indoors, in the very failure of my thought to be the object that it is
thinking.
Relativity is what guarantees that objects are never as they seem, and
not because they are ideas in my head—but because they aren’t. Large
objects emit gravitational fields that bend light, giving rise to the red
shift from distant stars that remained a mystery until Einstein proposed
relativity theory.24 Spacetime isn’t an empty box, but rather an undulating force field that emanates from objects. Now the thing about undulating temporality is that it really is measurably obvious in hyperobjects,
objects that are massive from a human standpoint. Clocks run slightly
faster when you are inside a plane traversing the ocean at thirty-nine
thousand feet, because the gravity well of Earth makes clocks run slower


Temporal Undulation

65

closer to its surface. An experiment in 2011 involving a number of very
accurate gyroscopes confirmed the existence of a gigantic spacetime
vortex around Earth.25 Time ripples along the surfaces of things, causing
them to bend. It gets better. If I am flying in a space shuttle above the
plane, and somehow able to read the clock on the plane, I will be able to
see it telling a different time again, due to the relative motion of the plane
and the shuttle. This has nothing to do with idealism or correlationism.
This relativity is hardwired into things themselves. Objects entangle one
another in a crisscrossing mesh of spacetime fluctuations.
Once we become aware of it, undulating temporality corrodes the
supposed fixity of smaller objects that lie around me. What is temporal
sauce for the goose of hyperobjects is also sauce for the gander of a pencil
twirled in my fingers. Tiny clocks on the twirling eraser at the far end of
the pencil register a slightly different time than tiny clocks on the graphite
tip that remains still, while tiny clocks on the tip of my nose . . . and
so on. Of course, humans may not notice such things, but the electrons
in humans notice them all the time. The very idea of spatial extension,
fundamental to Cartesian ontology, comes into question. The notion
of bland, consistent substance is not deep enough to account for hyperobjects. The very notion of a consistent substance is a species of accident, no different from the regular candy sprinkles of color, shape, and
so on. Salvador Dali’s rather cheesy painting of melting clocks is just the
way it is.
Hyperobjects end the idea that time and space are empty containers
that entities sit in. Newton and the rest inherited this empty-vessel model
basically intact as part of the legacy of Augustianian Neoplatonism. It is
rather strange, on reflection. It is surely part of a general overreaction to
Aristotle as Europe exited the Middle Ages, an overreaction that posited
modernity as such. Ironically, modern science—I here use modernity
and modern in the Latourian sense—continues to run with this Christian
Neoplatonist meme.26 It’s not until 1900 that time and space become
thinkable as effects of objects, rather than as absolute containers. So the
speculative realism movement must not only address correlationism—
the reduction of thinking to the human–world correlation—but also the
long history of anti-Aristotelianism.


66

Temporal Undulation

The Islamic world was spared the hobbling inheritance of a certain
Platonism, since it was indebted to Aristotle, a proto-object-oriented
thinker who held that the essence of a thing is in its form (morphē), not
in some beyond. From this idea it becomes plausible to think the universe as finite. Consider ar-Razi’s Doubts against Galen (that is, Galen,
the Greek physician). Ar-Razi holds that the subgroup that posited infinite and eternal space and time was in error, though not because they
were wrong to critique Galen and Aristotle. However, ar-Razi thinks
the problem of the infinite in Aristotelian terms. Ar-Razi argues that all
entities that are created are subject to corruption (that is, they degrade
and are impermanent). Thus, the heavens, although we are told they are
permanent, might simply consist of some very long-lasting substances
that only appear to be eternal to our human eyes. If not, then you are
claiming that they are uncreated, which is absurd. (Recall that this generation of Aristotelians thought what Ptolemy thought, namely that the
stars were fixed to orbs of a glass-like substance. Ignore the wrongness
of this supposition, because it’s irrelevant.)
Now for the truly amazing part. Ar-Razi writes that gold, gems, and
glass can disintegrate, but at much slower speeds than vegetables, fruits,
and spices. So we can expect whatever the celestial sphere is made of
to degrade over the course of thousands of years. Astronomical events
take place on scales vastly larger even than the scales on which epochs
between peoples happen. Think of a catastrophe such as a flood or a
plague, ar-Razi says. Such events create ruptures between epochs so that
the time of one entire people can pass to the time of another. How much
would a ruby degrade between the time of Hipparchus and the time of
Galen? So the degradation rate of a celestial body might be to that of a
ruby as that of a ruby is to that of a bunch of herbs. Now think about spatial scales. If you were to add a mountain’s worth of mass to the sun, you
would not be able to detect it on Earth because the sun is so massive in
the first place.27 By thinking through Aristotle, ar-Razi discovered hyperobjects in the tenth century. It’s time we made a return to Aristotle, who
is weirder than we think.28
Since objects don’t float in an infinite void, every entity has its own
time, both in a physical and in a deep ontological sense. Minkowski’s


Temporal Undulation

67

geometrical proof of relativity reveals something profound about this
fact. Since the speed of light is an unbreakable limit, every event takes
place within a light cone that specifies what counts as past and future.
Within the light cone, events relative to the event in question can be
specified as taking place in the past or in the present, here or elsewhere.
But outside the light cone, differentiating between now and then becomes meaningless, as does differentiating between here and there. An
event outside the light cone cannot be specified as happening at a certain place and at a certain time. I just can’t tell whether it occurs in the
“present” or the “past.” Time as such, construed as a series of points
that extends like Cartesian substances “into” the future “from” the past,
is itself an aesthetic phenomenon, not a deep fact that underlies things.
Thus, like the strange stranger, there is a future future. There is a time
that is beyond predictability, timing, or any ethical or political calculation. There is an elsewhere elsewhere. There is a place that is “nowhere”
and yet real: not a Neoplatonic beyond, but a real entity in the real universe. We should then entertain the possibility that hyperobjects allow
us to see that there is something futural about objects as such. If time is
not a neutral container in which objects float, but is instead an emission
of objects themselves, it is at least theoretically more plausible that an
object could exert a backward causality on other entities, than if objects
inhabit a time container that slopes in one particular direction. This wake
of causality would appear to flow backward “into” the present. The strange
strangeness of things is futural. Its shadow looms out of the future into
the present, like the shadows of futurity that Shelley sees casting their
flickering presence on the cave wall of poetry.29
Like all objects, hyperobjects compel us to handle them in certain
ways. They forcefully exert what Lingis calls the imperative. But because
of temporal foreshortening, hyperobjects are impossible to handle just
right. This aporia gives rise to a dilemma: we have no time to learn fully
about hyperobjects. But we have to handle them anyway. This handling
causes ripples upon ripples. Entities that are massively distributed in time
exert downward causal pressure on shorter-lived entities. Thus, one vivid
effect of global warming has been phenological asynchrony: the way
plant and animal life events have gone out of sync.30 When the time that


68

Temporal Undulation

one entity emits intersects with the time another entity emits, we get
an interference pattern, like the wavy lines in a painting by Bridget Riley
or Yukultji Napangati, artists to whom this study shall return somewhat
frequently, particularly in the following section. This interference pattern is known as phasing. Humans are caught in intersecting phases of
time. It is to this that we now turn, since the massiveness of hyperobjects
makes phasing vivid.


When I look at Untitled 2011 by the Aboriginal artist Yukultji Napangati,
I am gripped immediately in the tractor beam of the painting, which
seems to be gazing at me as much as or more than I am looking at it
(Plate 1). A simple JPEG of the painting doesn’t look like much. It’s a
largish square of thin brown waving lines, hand drawn. Yet as I approach
it, it seems to surge toward me, locking onto my optic nerve and holding me in its force field. Napangati’s painting strafes me with layer upon
layer of interference patterns. Her work makes Bridget Riley’s op art look
simple by comparison, though I find both painters astonishing.
I don’t experience Napangati’s painting as a series of lines that I resolve
into a whole. The whole painting leaps at me, as a unit. The painting is a
slice of the Dreamtime, the Aboriginal hyperobject, and a map of desert
sand hills where a small group of women gathered food and performed
rituals. Even though Untitled 2011 is a piece about a larger space, both
cosmic and earthly, the painting is a quantum all to itself, not an incomplete part. In no sense do I assemble the painting. Nothing about the
painting is passive, inert, waiting to be interpreted or completed. I find it
impossible to leave the painting. Hairs standing up on my body, tears
streaming down my face, slowly I tear myself away, only to return an
hour later to be drenched in its resonance.
My sense of being “in” a time and of inhabiting a “place” depends
on forms of regularity. The periodic rhythms of day and night, the sun
69

70

Phasing

“coming up”—only now I know that it doesn’t really come up. It is now
common knowledge that the moon’s “phases” are just the relationship
between the earth and the moon as they circumnavigate the sun. Hyperobjects seem to phase in and out of the human world. Hyperobjects are
phased: they occupy a high-dimensional phase space that makes them
impossible to see as a whole on a regular three-dimensional humanscale basis.
We can only see pieces of hyperobjects at a time. The reason why
they appear nonlocal and temporally foreshortened is precisely because
of this transdimensional quality. We only see pieces of them at once,
like a tsunami or a case of radiation sickness. If an apple were to invade
a two-dimensional world, first the stick people would see some dots as
the bottom of the apple touched their universe, then a rapid succession
of shapes that would appear like an expanding and contracting circular
blob, diminishing to a tiny circle, possibly a point, and disappearing.
What we experience as a lava-lamp fluidity—flowing and oozing metaphors abound in the new materialism—is precisely a symptom of our
less than adequate perception of higher dimensions of structure, which
is where the hyperobjects live.
That’s why you can’t see global warming. You would have to occupy
some high-dimensional space to see it unfolding explicitly. Think of a daffodil. A daffodil flower is a three-dimensional map of an algorithm executed by DNA and RNA in the daffodil’s genome. The tips of the crinkly
stem show the latest state of the algorithm unfolding in three-dimensional
phase space. The base of the flower is a plot of the beginnings of the
flower algorithm. Your face is a map of everything that happened to it.
Now think of global warming. We only see snapshots of what is actually
a very complex plot of a super complex set of algorithms executing
themselves in a high-dimensional phase space. When the weather falls
on your head, you are experiencing a bad photocopy of a piece of that
plot. What you once thought was real turns out to be a sensual representation, a thin slice of an image, a caricature of a piece of global climate.
A process just is a real object, but one that occupies higher dimension
than objects to which we are accustomed.


Phasing

71

A phase space is the set of all the possible states of a system. Objects
in phase space are intriguing and strange. If, for example, you plot the
sum of weather events in phase space, you discover an attractor, a shape
that looks like a folded figure 8 (Figure 7). Edward Lorenz discovered the
first strange attractor (the Lorenz Attractor) in precisely this way. A high
enough dimensional being could see global warming itself as a static
object. What horrifyingly complex tentacles would such an entity have,
this high-dimensional object we call global warming?
As it is, I only see brief patches of this gigantic object as it intersects
with my world. The brief patch I call a hurricane destroys the infrastructure of New Orleans. The brief patch I call drought burns the plains of

Figure 7. Lorenz Attractor. The first strange attractor was this pattern made by
weather events plotted in a suitably high dimensional space.


72

Phasing

Russia and the midwestern United States to a crisp. The back of my neck
itches with yesterday’s sunburn. Percy Shelley writes, “The awful shadow
of some unseen power / Floats through unseen among us.”1 Shelley was
writing about “intellectual beauty,” but now the line resonates in a speculative realist universe, as does his poem Mont Blanc, which begins “The
everlasting universe of things / Flows through the mind . . . ”2 The mountain acts like a beacon in the poem, appearing, then disappearing, then
reappearing: “Mont Blanc yet gleams on high” (line 127). The mountain
comes in and out of phase.
Thinking things as Nature is thinking them as a more or less static,
or metastable, continuity bounded by time and space. The classic image
of Nature is the Romantic or picturesque painting of a landscape. There
it is, over yonder—on the wall in the gallery. And it has over-yonder-ness
encoded throughout it: look at those distant hills, that branch suggesting
that we follow the perspective lines toward the vanishing point, and so on.3
We can animate this picture and produce an oozing, flowing, lavalampy version of the same thing. We should be suspicious of these new
and improved versions of Nature, which simply turn the static picture
into a flowing picture. Something remains the same: the sense of time as
a container. The picture appears complex—cinematic, Deleuzian: it is
no accident that Deleuze theorizes cinema beautifully. But this cinematic
flow had already been anticipated in the Romantic period. In an age
before the silver screen huge swathes of blank verse narrating the flow
of the subject opened up an ideological space in which cinema could
appear. Wordsworth is the first cinematic artist. The theorists of this
process relationism—Whitehead, Deleuze—conceive time as the liquid
in which the image melts and flows. This flowing aesthetic in contemporary thought manifests precisely to the extent that it has enabled us
to track hyperobjects. Think of the movie Manufactured Landscapes, a
study of the photographer Edward Burtynsky.4 The camera traces processes of production, the piling of e-waste, and so on. The pathos of that
incredible opening shot, tracking through an outlandishly large Chinese
factory, is precisely the pathos of a gaze floating through time—we have
no idea when the shot will finish, and, concurrently, just how enormous
the factory is. A process is simply an object seen from a standpoint that


Phasing

73

is 1 + n dimensions lower than that object’s dimensionality. As Burtynsky keeps including more and more in each shot, the movie includes
more and more of how industrial “functioning” is just a small, normalized region of a much larger space of mal-functioning: I hyphenate the
word to suggest that this space concerns a kind of dark or weird functioning, in which every movement, even “correct” functioning, becomes
visible as a distortion or “mistake.” Such is the disturbing quality of the
ecological vision, not some holistic oneness.
Process philosophy helps us to visualize how high-dimensional entities execute. Thus, a slightly upgraded way of seeing hyperobjects would
be the plot or graph. From cinematic aesthetics we can proceed to plots
and maps of algorithms that execute in phase space. Enormously powerful processors can do this now when they map climate. The arithmetical calculations, called floating-point operations (“flops”) that climate
mapping requires are measured in petaflops, namely one million billion
per second (1015). The graphics that draws attractors is not for providing
an incidental visual aid, but is instead the scientific work as such. Now
what the software is seeing really does exit from the world of the aesthetic container and aesthetic distance, since we’re no longer dealing with
time or space as containers, but including time and space as dimensions
of the high-dimensional phase space. Time is now radically inside objects,
rippling through them as I argued a while back. And space is inside
objects, differentiating their parts from one another. The trouble is that
we cannot help but fail to see such high-dimensional entities when they
are plotted in this way. Software “sees” them for us, then we see data or
slices of that phase space, rendered in some way to make it usable.
Thinking hyperobjects as transdimensional real things is valuable.
Global warming is not simply a mathematical abstraction that doesn’t
really pertain to this world. Hyperobjects don’t inhabit some conceptual
beyond in our heads or out there. They are real objects that affect other
objects. Indeed the philosophical view behind thinking that objects are
one thing and relations (which is what we’re really talking about when
we talk about math or transcendence) are another positively inhibits our
transition to an ecological age, even as it poses sophisticated theories
of emergence or process.


74

Phasing

Phasing means to approach, then diminish, from a certain fullness.
Jimi Hendrix–style guitar phasing seems to whoosh toward one’s hearing and away from it, as the phaser pedal restricts, then unrestricts,
the harmonic range of the sound. Hyperobjects seem to come and go,
but this coming and going is a function of our limited human access to
them. What we experience as the slow periodic recurrence of a celestial
event such as an eclipse or a comet is a continuous entity whose imprint
simply shows up in our social or cognitive space for a while. On this
view, then, what is called weather is as antiquated as the idea that the
phases of the waxing and waning moon are in the moon itself, rather
than in the relationship between the moon and Earth. Rather, weather
is a sensual impression of climate that happens to both humans and the
nonhuman entities they concern themselves with: cows, flood barriers,
tundra, umbrellas, and so on. The rain gauge buried in my garden selects
a small sample of this hyperobject for my inspection, a tube of water a
couple of inches high. Likewise, the contracting and expanding mercury
in the thermometer in the hallway tells me about temperature fluctuations inside the house, while sensors in my car tell me about a sliver of
climate while I’m driving. My attention span focuses on global warming
for a few seconds each day before returning to other matters. A series of
government regulations addresses one aspect of climate change (extinction), while ignoring others, such as runaway fossil fuel consumption. A
human perception of a hyperobject is akin to the sectioning technique in
architectural drawing. Since hyperobjects occupy a higher-dimensional
phase space than we can experience directly, we can only experience
somewhat constrained slices of them at any one time. The hyperobject
global warming churns away, emitting ghosts of itself for my perusal.
This horrible colossus is not capable of being visualized by humans. I can
picture a Lorenz Attractor, somewhat roughly. But picturing the gigantic system of which Lorenz Attractors themselves are little footprints is
daunting to say the least.
Napangati’s Untitled 2011 is a phase of Dreamtime, a phasing painting
whose waves undulate like Hendrix’s guitar. The painting itself forces me
to see higher and higher dimensions of itself, as if layers of phase space
were being superimposed on other layers. These layers appear deep, as if


Phasing

75

I could reach my arms into them. They float in front of the picture surface. They move. The painting holds me, spellbound. The painting looks
like a map or a plot in phase space, which is just what it is, in one sense:
a map of how women walked across some sand hills. Yet what appears to
be a map turns out to be a weapon. The painting emits spacetime, emits
an aesthetic field. The painting is a unit, a quantum that executes a function. It is a device, not just a map but also a tool, like a shaman’s rattle
or a computer algorithm. The function of the painting seems to be to
imprint me with the bright red shadow of a hyperobject, the Australian
Outback, the Dreamtime, the long history of the Pintupi Nine, the Lost
Tribe, some of the last Neolithic humans on Earth. We shall see when it
comes to talking about art in the time of hyperobjects just how significant it is that Napangati somehow manages to combine map and device.
What is significant here is that we are dealing with the inverse of a
view that says that mathematizable entities underlie other entities. On
the view this book is advocating, the object subtends the mathematizable forms. In other words, number is really computability: one means
countably one. This doesn’t mean that I am supplementing “hard” math
with something warm and fuzzy, a language that Heidegger himself, and
more so his apologists, sometimes slips into. This defensive thinking
won’t do: it’s precisely what has confined all the humanities to a smaller
and smaller island of human meaning for the last two centuries. The
Great Acceleration demands that we get our act together on that score.
The mathematical entity is the paraphrase—the mathematical entity
is the “warm and fuzzy” one, on the hither side of human meaning. A
hyperobject exists for us as a map in a high-dimensional phase space,
because it is impossible for us to grasp as a whole with our senses. But
this means the opposite of a Platonism that says that mathematical relationships underlie things. It only means that the mathematical as such
just is mathēsis, which is a Greek term that comes close to the Tibetan
gom, the term for meditation. Gom and mathēsis both mean something
like “getting used to,” “growing accustomed.”5 Mathematics in this sense,
beyond number, is the way the mind acclimatizes itself to reality. The
Lorenz Attractor is a way for us to breathe the rarefied conceptual oxygen of a higher-dimensional being, the climate. The climate is not a


76

Phasing

“space” or an “environment,” just a higher-dimensional object that we don’t
see directly. When it rains on my head, climate is raining. The biosphere
is raining. But what I feel are raindrops, and gaps between raindrops,
as I showed in “A Quake in Being.” Indeed, Kant’s example of the withdrawal of the in-itself is the humble raindrop. When I feel them, I am
always feeling my human translation of them into wet, cold, small things
pattering on my raincoat. The raindrop itself is radically withdrawn.6
The gaps I perceive between moments at which my mind is aware
of the hyperobject and moments at which it isn’t, do not inhere in the
hyperobject itself. This is not simply a matter of my “subjective” awareness versus an “objective” world. The same can be said of physical objects
that are lower-dimensional than the hyperobject in question. The gaps
a town experiences between being strafed by one set of tornadoes and
another set does not mark a gap of nothingness between two hyperobjects, or even within one hyperobject. Global warming doesn’t go
golfing at the weekend. The gaps and ruptures are simply the invisible
presence of the hyperobject itself, which looms around us constantly. On
this view, hyperobjects are disturbing clowns in an Expressionist painting, clowns who cover every available surface of the painting, leering into
our world relentlessly. The notion of “background” and its “foreground”
are only phases of an object that doesn’t “go anywhere” at all, at least not
on a human- or town-sized scale.
The psychotic intensity of Expressionist painting, poetry, and music
thus expresses something about the hyperobject much more effectively
than a cool mathematical diagram of phasing flows. The diagram is the
caricature, not the leering clowns. A claustrophobic universe unveils itself
to us, crammed with things: radiation, solar flares, interstellar dust, lampposts, and lice. Expressionism abolishes the play between background
and foreground. Objects thrust themselves towards us in a cramped or
claustrophobic pictorial space. The sensation of world, on this view, is
the false consciousness of gaps and backgrounds between and behind
things. In this way hyperobjects bring about the end of the world, as I
shall argue in part 2.
When a sound phases, now thicker, now narrower, another wave is
intersecting with a series of sound waves. At a lower level, a beat happens


Phasing

77

when one wave cancels out part of another wave. For a beat to exist, there
must be 1 + n waves that intersect. Phasing happens because one object
translates another one. This is a feature of how objects affect one another
in general, and we should explore this a little before accounting more
fully for how hyperobjects are phased.
An MP3 sample compresses a sound wave in a “lossy” way by cutting
some of it out. The preferred sampling rate for music recording is now
44,000 cycles per second, so there are 44,001 holes in between and on
either side of one second of sound. (Now they know how many holes it
takes to fill the Albert Hall.)7 Likewise, a JPEG is a lossy, compressed
sample of an image, and when you make a copy of a JPEG, the copy has
more holes in it than the original, so each JPEG copy becomes increasingly degraded. When a JPEG is made, optically sensitive electronics
on a chip are bombarded with photons, some of which are translated
into visible information in pixels on a screen. A series of tools executes a
function, withdrawn into the background against the image that results.
When we scrutinize the whole system, we find a bunch of gadgets that
work on one another, transducing and otherwise altering inscription
events such as photons or sound waves into electronic signals or electrochemical ones.
A hyperobject passes through a thousand sieves, emerging as translated information at the other end of the mesh. Thick raindrops tell me
of the coming storm, which flashes lightning in an unusual way that is
an index of global warming. Phasing is an indexical sign of an object that
is massively distributed in a phase space that is higher dimensional than
the equipment (our ears, the top of my head, a weather vane) used to
detect it. An index is a sign that is directly a part of what it indicates.
In the mesh of interconnectivity, the sieve through which hyperobjects
pass, smaller things become indexes of the hyperobjects inside which
they exist. A flock of birds stays on the lake for a curiously long period.
Frogs huddle for warmth and moisture on a wet doorstep.
What we are dealing with, with the phenomenon of phasing, is an
indexical sign that is a metonymy for the hyperobject. Metonymy is the
mereological figure, the figure that deals with parts and wholes and relationships. What we encounter when we study hyperobjects is a strange


78

Phasing

mereology in which parts do not disappear into wholes.8 Quite the reverse. Indeed, what we seem to have is what in Lacanian terminology is
called a not-all set. Objects seem to contain more than themselves. A
flock of birds on a lake is a unique entity, yet it is also part of a series
of hyperobjects: the biosphere, evolution, global warming. There is an
inevitable dislocation between the hyperobject and its indexical signs.
Otherwise, what’s the fuss all about? Gaia will eliminate its pathogens
and get on with the business of being itself. But an object is and is not
itself, at the same time, because it has parts that cannot be wholly subsumed into it. Otherwise phasing, and the beats and more generally the
indexical signs that are aspects of interactions between things, would fail
to occur. A phasing object is a sign of a rupture at the heart of being.
This rupture is not a physically definable place, like a crack or a seam.
It cannot be physically located “in” space or time, since space and time
are precisely on “this” side of it. Hyperobjects are big enough relative
to us that they cause us to become aware of the rupture, which following
Heidegger I have begun to call the Rift. The Rift exists at an ontological
intersection, not a physical one. The intersection is between a thing and
its appearance-for another thing, or things. Thus, the mesh of relations
is on one side of the Rift, the hither side, while what I call the strange
stranger is on the yonder side—again, not spatially but ontologically.
Now because of the strange mereology we have spoken of, one of
these “other things” can be the very object in question! An object can be
a member of itself, thus giving rise to set theoretical paradoxes that
plagued Russell. If a set can be a member of itself, then one can imagine
a set of sets that are not members of themselves. In order to cope with
such paradoxes we can do one of two things. One is to forget everything
we have just found out about hyperobjects. The other is to allow for the
existence of contradictory entities. It is the second path that we shall take
in this book. The path has been well established by the logician Graham
Priest, in a number of groundbreaking books and essays.9
Russell’s set paradox is the stepchild of something like mathematical
hyperobjects, the transfinite sets discovered by Georg Cantor. Think of
a line. Now split the line into two by cutting out the middle third portion. You now have two lines separated by a gap. Now repeat the process


Phasing

79

with the two lines. Continue ad infinitum: you have a Cantor Set, an
entity that contains infinity points, and infinity no-points: an outrageous
double infinity, as if we could suddenly see that some infinities were
larger than others. Infinity stops being a vague abstraction and starts
to become very precise. We can do calculations with it. We can, as Blake
wrote, hold infinity in the palm of our hand.10 A two-dimensional Cantor
Set known as a Sierpinski Carpet forms the aerial of a cell phone, because
electromagnetic waves are fractal and contain infinitesimal copies of
themselves: more wave is sampled by a fractal aerial than by a simple
one. If it is the case that an entity has more parts than it can encompass
in a whole, then objects are transfinite in some sense, fractals that contain more of themselves than they let on on the outside.
Objects, then, are like Doctor Who’s Tardis, a time-traveling spaceship
that is bigger on the inside than it is on the outside. The Tardis has a
“chameleon circuit” that enables it to enter into phase with other objects
in its vicinity: sadly for the Doctor, this chameleon circuit is stuck as
a 1960s police telephone box. The uncanny grinding, roaring sound
of the Tardis as it appears and disappears, coming in and out of phase
with specific regions of spacetime is a good image of the phasing of the
hyperobject. But the image of the time tunnel that frames each episode
of Doctor Who does not underlie things. Rather, it is the mesh that exists
on the hither side of the Rift between an entity and its appearance-for:
an abyss that floats in front of things. The abyss does not underlie things,
but rather allows things to coexist: it is the nonspatial “betweenness” of
things. Whenever I put my hand into the toaster oven I am thrusting
part of my body into an abyss.
The abyss opens up in the interaction of any two or more objects.
Indeed, since objects are inherently inconsistent (a fact to which we shall
return), an abyss opens up simply because of the Rift, the fact that an
object can “interact with itself ” because it is a spacing and a timing,
not a given, objectified entity. We have seen already how at the quantum
level systems seem to auto-affect, looping around on themselves. Phasing is evidence of some interaction between things, or between a thing,
if that is not too paradoxical a thing to say at this point (reminiscent
of the joke, “What is the difference between a duck? One of its legs is


80

Phasing

both the same.”) Entities seem to come and go, swaying to and fro in
the breeze of some carrier wave, now faint, now strong. An object times
another one, in a transitive sense. The moon times the earth. The sun
times the earth another way. The seasons are the way the earth’s orbit
translates the sun. The daylight and the night time the house, with its
sunny and shady sides. A blinking turn signal puts my car, the road, and
other cars into phase with one another. Electromagnetic waves put water
into different phases (for example, a liquid or gas). The smoothness of
phase transition is a smoothness-for me, not for the electrons in the H2O
that jump, or don’t jump, from one orbit to another. Phasing is an aesthetic event, a sensual entity-for some other entity or more.
The abyss is not an empty container, but rather a surging crowd of
beings, like the fanciful representation of hyperspace in the Doctor Who
credits, repeated in Star Wars episode 4 when the Millennium Falcon
flies faster than light.11 The “hyperness” of the hyperobject is precisely
the abyssal quality that I sense when I become aware that a flock of birds
on the lake is resting there because of global warming. The abyss is vivid
and it lies on “this” side of things. We have already seen that, as the righthand wing mirrors of American cars say, objects in mirror are closer
than they appear.


In a gigantic bamboo forest on Qi Lai Mountain in central Taiwan, it is
as if one is surrounded by a theater of air, leaves, and stalks. The bamboo
sways, sometimes violently, sometimes delicately, to the wind that rushes
through it. Each gust causes a cascade of bamboo clicks to sound in
front, to the right, to the left, and behind. A ridiculously complex assemblage of high-pitched frequencies floats, resembling something between
percussion and a hand stirring a bowlful of pebbles or small crystals.
The wind is heard in the bamboo. The bamboo forest is a gigantic wind
chime, modulating the wind into bambooese. The bamboo forest ruthlessly bamboo-morphizes the wind, translating its pressure into movement and sound. It is an abyss of bamboo-wind.
The abyss in front of things is interobjective. It floats among objects,
“between” them; though this between is not “in” spacetime—it is spacetime. On this view, what is called intersubjectivity—a shared space in
which human meaning resonates—is a small region of a much larger
interobjective configuration space. Hyperobjects disclose interobjectivity.
The phenomenon we call intersubjectivity is just a local, anthropocentric
instance of a much more widespread phenomenon, namely interobjectivity. Please don’t think that I mean something prior to or underneath
or behind intersubjectivity. Think of intersubjectivity as a particular instance of interobjectivity with which humans are familiar. In other words,
“intersubjectivity” is really human interobjectivity with lines drawn
81

82

Interobjectivity

around it to exclude nonhumans. This seems particularly clear in deconstructive critiques of intersubjectivity: they often rely on the ways in
which intersubjectivity as a concept excludes the media that organize
and transmit human information, such as classrooms, cell phones, and
markets. Or paper and ink and writing. Or two photocopiers or video
monitors, as in the art of Steve Calvert, in which various devices provide feedback to one another in a way similar to what happens when you
point a TV camera at a TV monitor (Figure 8). The wiring in my house
is an interobjective system. Objects such as light bulbs, a microwave oven,
wire, fuses, three computers, solar panels, and plugs are distributed so that
energy flows among them as evenly and as equally as possible. If they
were arranged differently—if the circuitry were put in series rather than
in parallel—then they would perform very differently: some items would
not operate at all, and some would be at a much higher risk of bursting

Figure 8. Steve Calvert, Electromagnetic Life 3, video feedback. Feedback loops
occur when enough of one entity resonates with enough of another. In the terms
this book uses, the system is interobjective. Intersubjectivity can be considered a
small region of a larger interobjective possibility space. Reproduced by permission.


Interobjectivity

83

into flame. Likewise, the houses in my street form an interobjective
system with the street itself and vehicles, stray dogs, and bouncing basketballs. We may scale up like this as far as we like. We will find that all
entities whatsoever are interconnected in an interobjective system that
elsewhere I call the mesh.1
A mesh consists of relationships between crisscrossing strands of
metal and gaps between the strands. Meshes are potent metaphors for
the strange interconnectedness of things, an interconnectedness that
does not allow for perfect, lossless transmission of information, but is
instead full of gaps and absences. When an object is born it is instantly
enmeshed into a relationship with other objects in the mesh. Heidegger
calls this mesh the contexture of equipment, a term that has roughly the
same metaphorical provenance.2 Ontologically speaking (from the standpoint of OOO), the mesh does not subtend things, but rather it floats “on
top of ” them, “in front of ” things.3
A mesh consists of links, and also of gaps between links. These links
and gaps are what enable causality to happen, when we think causality
in an expanded way, to include what I have been calling translation. An
MP3 is a highly perforated version of a sound, a JPEG is a highly perforated version of a picture. The meshwork that each object demonstrates
is common to less perforated sets of links, and less regular ones too. It is
precisely the gaps between and within things that enable entities to grip
them, like the synchromesh in the manual transmission system of a car.
Mesh means the threads and the holes between the threads.4
This fact profoundly affects our understanding of causality. It is the
causal dimension in which things are able to happen, and not happen.
To be born and to die, as well as to persist, is for the mesh to undergo
some distortion that might be felt throughout the mesh if the instruments were sensitive enough. Gravity wave detectors in Illinois are now
able to detect the waves emitted by objects from the beginning of the
known universe.5 The information received so far is strangely periodic,
as if pixilated: just like the regular sequence of holes in an industrially
produced mesh. Happily, mesh has etymological associations both with
mass and with mask: that is, the heft of a thing, and its illusory qualities
(qualities that, as I argue briefly here, have a causal reach).6


84

Interobjectivity

Authors of integral studies in the vein of Ken Wilber have coined the
term interobjectivity to refer to systems of related objects, as opposed to
systems of related subjects.7 To use the term in this way is to cause nothing whatsoever to change. On the view I expound here, by contrast, what
is called subject and what is called mind just are interobjective effects,
emergent properties of relationships between enmeshed objects. Some
neurons are wired together in a brain, and the brain sits in the skull of a
lifeform that is sitting at this computer, typing these words. Mind is not
“in” the brain but rather, to use the Heideggerian term, “thrown” into the
interobjective space consisting of a banker’s lamp, skull, computer, and
keyboard, as well as fingers, neurons, and Mahler’s seventh symphony
playing on iTunes, Michael Tilson Thomas conducting the San Francisco
Symphony Orchestra, a pair of eyes, a medium sized wooden Danish
dining chair covered with black velvet, the muscular system, and so on.8
The view that mind is interobjective is shared by enactive theories of
intelligence that have arisen from “connectionist” thinking in artificial
intelligence. On this view, if you walk and quack like a mind, then you
are one. This means that your mind is an effect-for some “observer.” It is
not “in” anything and it is not prior to objects but is rather an aftereffect
of them. To assert that mind is interobjective is to accede to the basic
argument in Alan Turing’s seminal essay “Computing Machinery and
Intelligence.” A human and a computer running some software are hidden from view. They feed an observer answers to questions posed by
the observer. If the observer reckons that the answers come from a person, then they come from a person.9 Such a form of personhood is quite
attenuated: it means that in effect, I am not a nonperson, since no distinction can be made between the answers given by a machine and answers
given by a person. Personhood then is also an effect in the mesh—it may
look solid from a distance, but as we approach it we find that it is full
of holes. If we think consciousness is an emergent property of certain
kinds of neural organization, we end up with Sorites paradoxes: What
constitutes a heap? Or to put it another way, exactly where does consciousness begin to emerge from nonconsciousness?
What is called consciousness is an aesthetic effect: it is consciousnessfor. Yet this does not make it unreal. When I walk gingerly over some


Interobjectivity

85

sharp rocks, what looks like intelligence to a passing balloonist with a
pair of binoculars might simply be my trying not to fall. The same
applies to an ant walking over a scattering of sand grains.10 Intelligence
need not be thought of as having a picture of reality in the mind, but
as an interaction between all kinds of entities that is somewhat “in the
eye of the beholder”—including, of course, myself, who feels quite clever
stumbling over the glacier, until my reflection causes me to topple sideways into the freezing water. My body, the glacier, the freezing water,
my brain, and my boots form an interobjective system, a little eddy of
metastability in the mesh. But it’s hyperobjects that give us the most
vivid glimpse of interobjectivity. Since we only see their shadow, we easily
see the “surface” on which their shadow falls as part of a system that they
corral into being. We see a host of interacting indexical signs.
On this view, a brain in a bucket, a favorite object of the philosopher
of mind, might indeed be a mind system: bucket plus water plus brain
plus wiring. But it’s likely that it would be a very different mind than
the same brain in a swimming pool full of jelly, or a brain in a skull in
a living, breathing body. Now since hyperobjects are by definition the
largest, longest-lasting objects we know; and since they strafe and penetrate the physical body at every available opportunity, like some demonic
version of the Force (from Star Wars); is it not highly likely that the
way our minds are is to some extent, perhaps a large extent, influenced
by hyperobjects? So that when we think the hyperobject, we are in some
sense thinking the conditions of possibility for the human mind? That
thinking the hyperobject is thus thinking, in Marxist terms, the base of
the mind, and not simply the (ideological, cultural) superstructure? This
would mean that an account of hyperobjects was among other things
an account of the fabric of the human mind. My thinking is thus a mental translation of the hyperobject—of climate, biosphere, evolution—not
just figuratively, but literally. Some speculative realist philosophy has
indeed pushed thinking to recognize its physical roots in this rather disturbing manner, most notably the work of Iain Hamilton Grant.11
Interobjectivity provides a space that is ontologically “in front of ”
objects, in which phenomena such as what is called mind can happen.
The massiveness and distribution of hyperobjects simply force us to take


86

Interobjectivity

note of this fact. Hyperobjects provide great examples of interobjectivity—namely, the way in which nothing is ever experienced directly, but
only as mediated through other entities in some shared sensual space.
We never hear the wind in itself, argues Heidegger, only the wind in the
door, the wind in the trees.12 This means that for every interobjective
system, there is at least one entity that is withdrawn. We see the footprint
of a dinosaur left in some ancient rock that was once a pool of mud (Figure 9). The dinosaur’s reality exists interobjectively: there is some form of
shared space between the rock, ourselves, and the dinosaur, even though
the dinosaur isn’t there directly. The print of a dinosaur’s foot in the mud
is seen as a foot-shaped hole in a rock by humans sixty-five million years
later. There is some sensuous connection, then, between the dinosaur,
the rock, and the human, despite their vastly differing timescales.
Now, when we return in our mind’s eye to the time of the dinosaur
herself, we discover something very strange. All we find there is another

Figure 9. Dinosaur footprints at Dinosaur State Park and Arboretum, Rocky Hill,
Connecticut. An interobjective system consisting (at least) of a dinosaur, mud, a
human photographer, and electromagnetic waves. Photograph by Daderot.


Interobjectivity

87

region of interobjective space in which impressions of the dinosaur are
transmitted—tooth marks in some hapless prey, the frozen stare of the
dinosaur as she looks at her next victim, the smooth, scaly feel of her
skin. The dinosaur leaves a footprint in some mud. The footprint is not
the dinosaur. A fly lands on the dinosaur’s left eyelid. The fly’s apprehension of the dinosaur’s eyelid is not the dinosaur. The dinosaur blinks. Her
blink is not the dinosaur. The dinosaur’s pea-sized brain registers the
fly’s feet. The registration is not the dinosaur, and so on. More dinosaur
prints, even when the dinosaur is alive. Even the dinosaur doesn’t know
herself entirely, but only in a rough translation that samples and edits
her being. A mosquito or an asteroid has their own unique sample of
dinosaur-ness, and these samples are not dinosaurs. Why?
Because there is a real dinosaur, withdrawn even from herself. The real
dinosaur is a mystery, yet not nebulous—just this dinosaur, this actual
one, she who stepped in the mud. Mystery comes from the Greek muein
(to close). The dinosaur is closed off, secret, unspeakable—even to herself. Whatever happens concerning her—the gyrations of her tiny mind,
the imprint of the foot, the delicate tracery of the fly, my thinking about
dinosaurs—occurs in an interobjective space that is ontologically in front
of this mystery realm. Evolution and geological time are simply large
enough beings to make this interobjective space visible.
An ancient bamboo forest on Qi Lai Mountain is a hyperobject.
Watching a movie of the forest, you hear and see the wind in the bamboo, the bamboo stems clicking one another. What you are also seeing
is a QuickTime movie, which samples visual images and sound at a certain rate, translating them into a more-or-less perforated version of
themselves. What you are watching is my hand, moving slightly as the
muscles in my right forearm fail to maintain stillness. What you are
watching are photons from the sun, reflecting from quanta in the chloroplasts that make the bamboo green. What you are watching are chloroplasts, bacteria hiding from the environmental cataclysm they created,
the cataclysm called oxygen, two and a half billion years ago. The sum
total of all the sampling events by which an object inscribes itself on
other objects is a history, in both senses of that wonderfully ambivalent Greek term—since “history” can mean both events and recording.


88

Interobjectivity

Hyperobjects have a history of their own, not simply insofar as they
interact with humans.
This history is strictly the time of hyperobjects. Raindrops splatter on
the ground in western California. They record the history of La Niña, a
massive weather system in the Pacific. In particular, they record how the
Japanese tsunami scooped up some of La Niña and dumped it on trees
and hills and other objects in the object called the United States. La Niña
itself is the footprint of a hyperobject called global warming. Another
footprint may well have been the Japanese earthquake itself, since the
changing oceanic temperature may have changed the pressure on Earth’s
crust, resulting in an earthquake. The quake destroyed four nuclear reactors. Quanta from these reactors, known as alpha, beta, and gamma particles, inscribe themselves in soft tissue around the world. We are living
textbooks on global warming and nuclear materials, crisscrossed with
interobjective calligraphy.
A dinosaur footprint in fossilized mud is not a dinosaur. Rather, the
footprint is a trace of the hyperobject evolution that joins me, the dinosaur, and the mud together, along with my intentional act of holding
them in mind. There is a gigantic smudge in the Cosmic Microwave
Background, which to some astrophysicists now tells of a bubble universe that collided with our own.13 Hyperobjects leave footprints everywhere, like the invisible goddess Astraea, the goddess of justice, “forever
departing from this world.”14 Yet however useful it is, there is something
disturbing about this vision, something slightly uncanny that has forced
many philosophers to (1) rigorously separate the causal level from the
aesthetic realm, and (2) regard the aesthetic realm as a domain of evil.
There is something even more startling about the footprints of hyperobjects. These footprints are signs of causality, and of here is both subjective and objective genitive. Causality and the aesthetic, the realm of signs
and significance and sensation, are one and the same. Hyperobjects are
so big that they compel us toward this counterintuitive view. Interobjectivity eliminates the difference between cause and sign. Let’s pause and
consider just how remarkable this is.
To do so, it would be most illuminating to take a short detour through
an area that seems tangential: cognition and consciousness. One benefit of


Interobjectivity

89

the detour is that it will allow us to discern why the view of interobjectivity
is so surprising: it has to do with the long history of correlationism—the
restriction of thinking to the human–world correlation—resulting in phenomena such as the pure relationism of structuralist accounts of linguistics and anthropology (and so on), and the cybernetics of Spencer-Brown.
With its interest in how firing neurons can give rise to mind, neuroscience has an inkling of the magical quality of bringing signs and causality together, when it thinks the systems theory of Luhmann and, behind
it, the Mark of Spencer-Brown’s Laws of Form.15 What the perspective of
hyperobjects adds to this theory is exactly what deconstruction adds to
structuralist theories of relational meaning. Or possibly what deconstruction takes away: for every system of meaning, there must be some opacity for which the system cannot account, which it must include–exclude
in order to be itself. Here is the substantial difference between SpencerBrown’s Mark and Jacques Derrida’s contemporaneous re-mark, a sign
that is also not a sign, just a smudge or a blot, or simply the inscribable
surface on which the mark is written.16 In this case, it is the seeming
weirdness of deconstruction’s observation that is more demystifying than
the relationism that it deconstructs.
Every interobjective space implies at least one more object in the vicinity: let us call this the 1 + n. Writing depends on 1 + n entities: paper, ink,
letters, conventions. The human anthropomorphizes the cup and the cup
cup-omorphizes the human, and so on. In this process there are always
1 + n objects that are excluded. Returning to the question of consciousness, we can see how interobjectivity does work very similarly to deconstruction’s discovery of the re-mark. Deconstruction may simply be the tip
of a larger iceberg altogether. “Mind” emerges from interactions between
neurons and other objects precisely because those interactions themselves are always-already aesthetic–causal. The magic of systems thinking
evaporates in the face of a deeper magic, the magic of real objects that
subtend the object system, objects that emit time, space, and causality.
Hyperobjects simply enable us to see what is generally the case:
(1) Protagoras notwithstanding, objects are not made-to-measure for
humans.


90

Interobjectivity

(2) Objects do not occur “in” time and space, but rather emit spacetime.
(3) Causality does not churn underneath objects like a machine in the
basement, but rather floats in front of them.
(4) The causal dimension, in which things like explosions are taken to
happen, is also the aesthetic dimension, in which things like Nude
Descending a Staircase are taken to happen.

Thus, the idea that causality is the machinery in the basement and the
aesthetic is the candy on top—the Scylla and Charybdis against which
medium-sized objects, such as global warming, a dinosaur, and a droplet
of soy sauce, have been ground to a pulp by eliminative materialism—is
now obsolete. We have hyperobjects to thank for its obsolescence.
Now we are in a position to reach quite a stunning conclusion about
the nature of temporality when it comes to thinking hyperobjects. As was
just noted, the apparent traces of hyperobjects appear as indexical signs,
like the footprints of an invisible person walking across the sand: Astraea,
“constantly departing from the world.”17 From this we can draw a conclusion that startlingly strikes against the metaphysics of presence (the
idea that time is a succession of now points, that being present is being
real, and so on). Instead, we discover that the “present moment” is a shifting, ambiguous stage set, like the beach washed by the tide and imprinted
by the footsteps of Astraea. The appearance of things, the indexical signs
on the seashore, is the past of a hyperobject. What we commonly take to
lie underneath a present thing, its past state, is its appearance-for some
entity (a rain gauge, a sensor, a philosopher). Its causal traces float in
front of it, in the realm of appearance, the aesthetic dimension.
Think of a city. A city contains all kinds of paths and streets that one
might have no idea of on a day-to-day basis. Yet even more so, you could
live in a city such as London for fifty years and never fully grasp it in
its scintillating, oppressive, joyful London-ness. The streets and parks
of London, the people who live there, the trucks that drive through its
streets, constitute London but are not reducible to it. London is not a
whole that is greater than the sum of its parts. Nor is London reducible
to those parts. London can’t be “undermined” downward or upward.
Likewise, London isn’t just an effect of my mind, a human construct—


Interobjectivity

91

think of the pigeons in Trafalgar Square. Nor is London something that
only exists when I walk through the Victoria Line tunnel to the Tate
Gallery at Pimlico Underground Station, or when I think about London,
or write this sentence about London. London can’t be “overmined” into
an aftereffect of some (human) process such as thinking or driving or
essay writing. To this extent writing about music really is like dancing
about architecture—and a good thing too. Everything is like that.
The streets beneath the streets, the Roman Wall, the boarded-up
houses, the unexploded bombs, are records of everything that happened
to London. London’s history is its form. Form is memory. We make a
weird return to Aristotle, who specified that the form of a thing is its
essence and that matter (“material cause”) is a perspective trick, a backward glance at the object—quarry, sand, crushed dinosaur bones—that
were appropriated to form the object in question. London is a photograph of its past. When you walk through the streets (it seems corny
to put it this way, but it’s not really) you are walking through history.
The dirt on a building is part of the building’s form, which John Ruskin
called the stain of time.18 Just as a hard drive is a surface on which data
is inscribed, so London is a series of surfaces on which causality has
been inscribed. There is no difference between causality and aesthetic
appearance (aisthēsis).
Appearance is the past. Essence is the future. The strange strangeness
of a hyperobject, its invisibility—it’s the future, somehow beamed into
the “present.” The futurality is what is meant by the term attractor, as in
the Lorenz Attractor, an entity occupying a high-dimensional phase space
that traces weather patterns. It is hard to think an attractor as the precise
opposite of a telos, a destiny or destination or end. But this is exactly
what an attractor is. An attractor does not pull things toward it through
time. In this sense, attractor is a misleading term. Rather, the attractor
radiates temporality from the future into the present. An attractor is
the future future of a hyperobject, in the terms outlined in the section on
undulating temporality. The future future lies ontologically “underneath”
the past! Any local manifestation of an attractor is simply an old photograph, an appearance-for that exists in an interobjective space. Even more
astonishing than the fact that appearance is the past, essence is the future.


92

Interobjectivity

What we need, then, is not only ecology without Nature, for which I
have argued. We also need, as I shall argue later in this study, ecology
without matter. And just to cap it all, we need ecology without the present.
Indeed, one could successfully argue that it’s the presentism of contemporary environmentalisms that put them on the wrong side of history. This
presentism manifests in a wide variety of ways. Consider the rhetoric of
immediacy common to what I have called ecomimesis: stop thinking,
go out into Nature, turn off your irony. Presentism also manifests in the
injunction to stop thinking and do something, the paradoxical form taken
by the contemporary beautiful soul, a defining, overarching subject position of modernity that has been with us since the late eighteenth century.19 All too often the siren song of the beautiful soul these days comes
in the form of a call to act, now! In this sense it appears to be its opposite.
Consider a brief example from a Twitter exchange I had recently, based
on a comment I had read there: “Michael Moore is self-serving because
his movies have not created real, substantial social change. The point is to
change things, now.” It sounds awfully like the Nature injunction: “The
point is to stop thinking, stop reflecting, go out and act.” For this reason, I grow a little queasy when I read Brassier’s translation of Quentin
Meillassoux’s speculative realist cri de guerre: “the great outdoors.”20
The cynical ideological distance typical of modernity is maintained by
these injunctions to act, which induce the guilt that cripples genuine
action—which of course includes reflection and art. But more important for our purposes, hyperobjects themselves prevent us from being
presentist. The present is precisely nowhere to be found in the yawning
Rift opening between the future and past, essence and appearance. We
simply make it however big we want, and this product of our imagination is a fetish, a fiction: one second, one hour, one day, a century—even
a millennium or a geological period. The overbearing metaphysics of
presence inscribed into every timekeeping device (especially the digital
ones) is, I suppose (without much evidence), responsible in some measure for the psychic distress of modern humans. There is a very simple
explanation for this distress: there is no present, yet the clock screams
that you must change your focus now and have that meeting, pull that
face on the chat show, sign the divorce paper, buy the product.


Interobjectivity

93

Please don’t think that this is Luddite primitivism. It is only an observation based on some quite graphic experiences of different kinds of
temporality. It is difficult to believe, naturally, when one is immersed in
a vast ocean of presentist metaphysics inscribed into every device about
one’s person. My solution to presentism is not a quasi-Buddhist “living
in the now” popular with forms of Nature mysticism. Nonhuman sentient beings are admired (or pitied) for living in this “now.” In admiring
(or pitying) them thus, we only see them as instruments of our technological era, extensions of the ticking clocks of metaphysical presence.
This is not a progressive ecological strategy. Like Nature, like matter, the
present has not served ecology well.
I shall not advocate presentism to fight presentism. Rather I am suggesting aikido—an exaggeration of the lack of a true now. What is called
nowness in Buddhist contemplative theory is not a point or even a bubble, no matter how wide, but a fluid, uncanny washing back and forth
like a current and an undertow. There is a Rift between essence and
appearance, the slide between future and past.21 The exaggeration of the
Rift of no present is given to us by hyperobjects.
The present does not truly exist. We experience a crisscrossing set of
force fields, the aesthetic–causal fields emanated by a host of objects.
Anyone familiar with relativity theory will find this idea reasonably
intuitive. What is called the present is simply a reification, an arbitrary
boundary drawn around things by a particular entity—a state, philosophical view, government, family, electron, black hole. Time is not a
series of now-points (Aristotle himself refuted this idea) but rather a
sickening surge, like crosstown traffic, or an ocean with many currents;
or “a river without banks,” like the title of a painting by Marc Chagall.22
Time is a flurry of spells and counterspells cast by objects themselves.
Past and future do not intersect in the usually visualized way, as (say)
the left-hand and right-hand sides of a cursor blinking on a screen. What
we have instead is a nonspatial rift between past and future that corresponds to the Rift between appearance and essence. Between these
two fundamental forces, the present is nowhere: objects are never present.
The present is not even a small sliver, like the cursor—a now-point. Nor
is the present a bubble whose far side is the past and whose near side is


94

Interobjectivity

the future (or however one wants to imagine it). Currently, hyperobjects
are so large, compared with humans, that the way in which essence is the
future and appearance is the past simply become far more vivid than
when we consider a pea or a tomcat. Let us consider a brief example.
When the little boy Jim in the movie Empire of the Sun sees the energy
flash of the first nuclear bomb, he says that it is “like God taking a photograph.”23 We might at first consider this phrase to be a judgment, a
demonic repetition of medieval eschatology. But a photograph is not the
essence of a thing: the world remains, the future now disclosed to be
on this side, the hither side of things, by the shocking appearance of the
energy flash of a hyperobject. The future is the world after the bomb, this
world, the Great Acceleration. God’s photograph does not bring about
an apocalypse in the sense of a total dissolution of things, but rather it
brings about the end of the world as a horizon or limit that exists “over
there,” over yonder, like Nature, or indeed, like God.
A strange beingness is injected back into the coexistence of things on
Earth. The injection needles are every gamma, beta, and alpha particle
that radiates from the exploding bomb. The cataclysm closes the beyond
as either a place of meaning or a void of no-meaning, cut off from this
“mere” Earth. A hyperobject literally photographs us, casting uncanny
shadows on the walls of Hiroshima, engraving our flesh with light. Simplistic presence and simplistic absence are what evaporate, along with
the lifeforms. The unknown soul of things, the essence, remains on the
hither side of the flash, which is why there are at least two movies that
talk about hyperobjects in terms of “the day after.”24 By no means should
we be happy that we exploded a nuclear bomb that day. It is more like
this: the cataclysm was such that it forced us to see. Hyperobjects bring
about the end of modernity.
Futurality is reinscribed into the present, ending the metaphysics of
presence: not through some neat philosophical footwork, but because
the very large finitude of hyperobjects forces humans to coexist with a
strange future, a future “without us.” (Recall that plutonium and global
warming have amortization rates of 24,100 and 100,000 years respectively.) Thanks to hyperobjects, the idea that events are tending toward
the future, drawn by some ineluctable telos, is discovered decisively to be


Interobjectivity

95

a human reification of aesthetic–causal appearance-for. It is the -for that
indicates that we are already in an interobjective space when it comes to
thinking this way, a space demarcated by entities that subtend the interobjective space.
Hyperobjects are simply vast enough to force us to this conclusion.
Nonhuman beings strike a devastating blow against teleology, a blow
detected by Darwin and celebrated by Marx, who wrote Darwin a fan
letter for his opposition to teleology.25 The end of teleology is the end of
the world. This end is precisely not an instant vaporization, but rather
a lingering coexistence with strange strangers. For the end of the world
is the end of endings, the end of telos, and the beginning of an uncertain, hesitating futurality. It is appropriate then that we leave part 1 of
this book in this way, glimpsing the end of the world that constitutes
the beginning of part 2. It is to the “reaction shot” that we must now
turn, since the first part of the book has done something like an adequate
job of shocking us, a faint echo of the shocking power of hyperobjects
themselves. What reality is it that humans now inhabit? How should they
dispose themselves toward the entities they have discovered?


Figure 10. Judy Natal, Future Perfect: Steam Portrait #28. The uncanny
nothingness of the cloud forces the viewer into a disturbing intimacy with the
clothed figure. Part of Natal’s Future Perfect series, this image dramatizes the way
the environment encroaches on human social, psychic, and philosophical space.
Copyright Judy Natal 2012, www.judynatal.com. Reproduced by permission.

You are walking out of the supermarket. As you approach your car, a
stranger calls out, “Hey! Funny weather today!” With a due sense of
caution—is she a global warming denier or not?—you reply yes. There
is a slight hesitation. Is it because she is thinking of saying something
about global warming? In any case, the hesitation induced you to think
of it. Congratulations: you are living proof that you have entered the time
of hyperobjects. Why? You can no longer have a routine conversation
about the weather with a stranger. The presence of global warming looms
into the conversation like a shadow, introducing strange gaps. Or global
warming is spoken or—either way the reality is strange.
A hyperobject has ruined the weather conversation, which functions
as part of a neutral screen that enables us to have a human drama in
the foreground. In an age of global warming, there is no background,
and thus there is no foreground. It is the end of the world, since worlds
depend on backgrounds and foregrounds. World is a fragile aesthetic
effect around whose corners we are beginning to see. True planetary
awareness is the creeping realization not that “We Are the World,” but
that we aren’t.
Why? Because world and its cognates—environment, Nature—are ironically more objectified than the kinds of “object” I am talking about in
this study. World is more or less a container in which objectified things
float or stand. It doesn’t matter very much whether the movie within the
99

100

The End of the World

context of world is an old-fashioned Aristotelian movie of substances
decorated with accidents; or whether the movie is a more avant-garde
Deleuzian one of flows and intensities. World as the background of
events is an objectification of a hyperobject: the biosphere, climate, evolution, capitalism (yes, perhaps economic relations compose hyperobjects). So when climate starts to rain on our head, we have no idea
what is happening. It is easy to practice denial in such a cognitive space:
to set up, for example, “debates” in which different “sides” on global
warming are presented. This taking of “sides” correlates all meaning and
agency to the human realm, while in reality it isn’t a question of sides,
but of real entities and human reactions to them. Environmentalism
seems to be talking about something that can’t be seen or touched. So in
turn environmentalism ups the ante and preaches the coming apocalypse. This constant attempt to shock and dismay inspires even more
defiance on the opposite side of the “debate.”
Both sides are fixated on world, just as both sides of the atheism debate are currently fixated on a vorhanden (“present at hand”), objectively
present God. As irritating for New Atheists such as Richard Dawkins to
hear that atheism is just another form of belief, it nevertheless is—or at
any rate, it holds exactly the same belief about belief as the fundamentalists. Belief is a token, a mental object that you grip as hard as possible,
like your wallet or car keys. In exactly the same way, it is annoying for
environmentalists to talk about ecology without Nature. The argument
is heard as nihilism or postmodernism. But really it is environmentalism
that is nihilist and postmodernist, just as fundamentalism’s belief about
belief marks it as a form of ontotheological nihilism. The ultimate environmentalist argument would be to drop the concepts Nature and world,
to cease identifying with them, to swear allegiance to coexistence with
nonhumans without a world, without some nihilistic Noah’s Ark.
In any weather conversation, one of you is going to mention global
warming at some point. Or you both decide not to mention it but it looms
over the conversation like a dark cloud, brooding off the edge of an ellipsis.1 This failure of the normal rhetorical routine, these remnants of shattered conversation lying around like broken hammers (they must take
place everywhere), is a symptom of a much larger and deeper ontological


The End of the World

101

shift in human awareness. And in turn, this is a symptom of a profound
upgrade of our ontological tools. As anyone who has waited while the
little rainbow circle goes around and around on a Mac, these upgrades
are not necessarily pleasant. It is very much the job of philosophers and
other humanities scholars to attune ourselves to the upgrading process
and to help explain it.
What is the upgrading process? In a word, the notion that we are living “in” a world—one that we can call Nature—no longer applies in any
meaningful sense, except as nostalgia or in the temporarily useful local
language of pleas and petitions. We don’t want a certain species to be
farmed to extinction, so we use the language of Nature to convince a legislative body. We have a general feeling of ennui and malaise and create
nostalgic visions of hobbit-like worlds to inhabit. These syndromes have
been going on now since the Industrial Revolution began to take effect.
As a consequence of that revolution, however, something far bigger
and more threatening is now looming on our horizon—looming so as to
abolish our horizon, or any horizon. Global warming has performed a
radical shift in the status of the weather. Why? Because the world as
such—not just a specific idea of world but world in its entirety—has evaporated. Or rather, we are realizing that we never had it in the first place.
We could explain this in terms of the good old-fashioned Aristotelian
view of substance and accidents. For Aristotle, a realist, there are substances that happen to have various qualities or accidents that are not
intrinsic to their substantiality. In section Epsilon 2 of the Metaphysics
Aristotle outlines the differences between substances and accidents.
What climate change has done is shift the weather from accidental to
substantial. Aristotle writes, “Suppose, for instance, that in the season of
the Cynosure [the Dog Days of summer] arctic cold were to prevail, this
we would regard as an accident, whereas, if there were a sweltering heatwave, we would not. And this is because the latter, unlike the former,
is always or for the most part the case.”2 But these sorts of violent changes
are exactly what global warming predicts. So every accident of the weather
becomes a potential symptom of a substance, global warming. All of a
sudden this wet stuff falling on my head is a mere feature of some much
more sinister phenomenon that I can’t see with my naked human eyes. I


102

The End of the World

need terabytes of RAM to model it in real time (this has been available
for about ten years).
There is an even spookier problem arising from Aristotle’s arctic summer idea. If those arctic summers continue, and if we can model them as
symptoms of global warming, then there never was a genuine, meaningful (for us humans) sweltering summer, just a long period of sweltering
that seemed real because it kept on repeating for, say, two or three millennia. Global warming plays a very mean trick. It reveals that what we
took to be a reliable world was actually just a habitual pattern—a collusion between forces such as sunshine and moisture and humans expecting such things at certain regular intervals and giving them names, such
as Dog Days. We took weather to be real. But in an age of global warming
we see it as an accident, a simulation of something darker, more withdrawn—climate. As Harman argues, world is always presence-at-hand—
a mere caricature of some real object.3
Now let’s think the evaporation of world from the point of view of
foreground and background. A weather conversation provides a nice
background to our daily affairs, nice to the extent that we don’t pay too
much attention to it. Precisely for it to be a background, it has to operate
in our peripheral vision. Thus, the conversation about the weather with
a stranger is a safe way to acknowledge our coexistence in social space.
It’s “phatic,” according to Roman Jakobson’s six-part model of communication; that is, it draws attention to the material medium in which the
communication is occurring.4 Likewise, the weather as such is a background phenomenon. It might loom distressingly into the foreground as
a tornado or as a drought, but most often those are temporary affairs—
there is a larger temporal backdrop against which they seem to occur as
isolated incidents.
Now what happens when global warming enters the scene? The background ceases to be a background, because we have started to observe it.
Strange weather patterns and carbon emissions caused scientists to start
monitoring things that at first only appeared locally significant. That’s
the old definition of climate: there’s the climate in Peru, the climate on
Long Island, and so on. But climate in general, climate as the totality
of derivatives of weather events—in much the same way as inertia is a


The End of the World

103

derivative of velocity—is a beast newly recognized via the collaboration
of weather, scientists, satellites, government agencies, and other entities.
This beast includes the sun, since it’s infrared heat from the sun that is
trapped by the greenhouse effect of gases such as CO2. So global warming is a colossal entity that includes entities that exist way beyond Earth’s
atmosphere, and yet it affects us intimately, right here and now. Global
warming covers the entire surface of Earth, and 75 percent of it extends
five hundred years into the future. Remember what life was like in the
early 1500s?
Global warming is really here—even more spookily, it was already
here, already influencing the supposedly real wet stuff falling on my head
and the warm golden stuff burning my face at the beach. That wet stuff
and that golden stuff, which we call weather, turns out to have been a
false immediacy, an ontic pseudo-reality that can’t stand up against the
looming presence of an invisible yet far more real global climate. Weather,
that handy backdrop for human lifeworlds, has ceased to exist, and along
with it, the cozy concept of lifeworld itself. Lifeworld was just a story
we were telling ourselves on the inside of a vast, massively distributed
hyperobject called climate, a story about how different groups were partitioned according to different horizons—concepts now revealed as ontic
prejudices smuggled into the realm of ontology. Global warming is a big
problem, because along with melting glaciers it has melted our ideas of
world and worlding. Thus, the tools that humanists have at their disposal
for talking about the ecological emergency are now revealed, by global
warming itself, to be as useless as the proverbial chocolate teapot. It is
rather like the idea of using an antique (or better, antiqued) Christmas
ornament as a weapon.
The spooky thing is, we discover global warming precisely when it’s
already here. It is like realizing that for some time you had been conducting your business in the expanding sphere of a slow-motion nuclear
bomb. You have a few seconds for amazement as the fantasy that you
inhabited a neat, seamless little world melts away. All those apocalyptic
narratives of doom about the “end of the world” are, from this point of
view, part of the problem, not part of the solution. By postponing doom
into some hypothetical future, these narratives inoculate us against the


104

The End of the World

very real object that has intruded into ecological, social, and psychic
space. As we shall see, the hyperobject spells doom now, not at some
future date. (Doom will assume a special technical meaning in this study
in the “Hypocrisies” section.)
If there is no background—no neutral, peripheral stage set of weather,
but rather a very visible, highly monitored, publicly debated climate—
then there is no foreground. Foregrounds need backgrounds to exist.
So the strange effect of dragging weather phenomena into the foreground as part of our awareness of global warming has been the gradual
realization that there is no foreground! The idea that we are embedded
in a phenomenological lifeworld, tucked up like little hobbits into the
safety of our burrow, has been exposed as a fiction. The specialness
we granted ourselves as unravelers of cosmic meaning, exemplified in
the uniqueness of Heideggerian Dasein, falls apart since there is no
meaningfulness possible in a world without a foreground–background
distinction. Worlds need horizons and horizons need backgrounds, which
need foregrounds. When we can see everywhere (when I can use Google
Earth to see the fish in my mom’s pond in her garden in London), the
world—as a significant, bounded, horizoning entity—disappears. We
have no world because the objects that functioned as invisible scenery
have dissolved.5
World is an aesthetic effect based on a blurriness and aesthetic distance. This blurriness derives from ignorance concerning objects. Only
in ignorance can objects act like blank screens for the projection of
meaning. “Red sky at night, shepherd’s delight” is a charming old saw
that evokes days when shepherds lived in worlds bounded by horizons
on which things such as red sunsets occurred. The sun goes down, the
sun comes up—of course now we know it doesn’t: Galileo and Copernicus tore holes in that notion of world. Likewise, as soon as humans know
about climate, weather becomes a flimsy, superficial appearance that is a
mere local representation of some much larger phenomenon that is strictly
invisible. You can’t see or smell climate. Given our brains’ processing
power, we can’t even really think about it all that concretely. At the very
least, world means significantly less than it used to—it doesn’t mean “significant for humans” or even “significant for conscious entities.”


The End of the World

105

A simple experiment demonstrates plainly that world is an aesthetic
phenomenon. I call it The Lord of the Rings vs. the Ball Popper Test. For
this experiment you will need a copy of The Two Towers, the second
part of director Peter Jackson’s Lord of the Rings trilogy.6 You will also
require a Playskool Busy Ball Popper, made by Hasbro. Now play the
scene that I consider to be the absolute nadir of horror, when Frodo,
captured by Faramir, is staggering around the bombed-out city Osgiliath
when a Nazgul (a ringwraith) attacks on a “fell beast,” a terrifying winged
dragon-like creature.
Switch on the Ball Popper. You will notice the inane tunes that the
Popper plays instantly undermine the coherence of Peter Jackson’s narrative world.
The idea of world depends on all kinds of mood lighting and mood
music, aesthetic effects that by definition contain a kernel of sheer ridiculous meaninglessness. It’s the job of serious Wagnerian worlding to
erase the trace of this meaninglessness. Jackson’s trilogy surely is Wagnerian, a total work of art (Gesamtkunstwerk) in which elves, dwarves,
and men have their own languages, their own tools, their own architecture, done to fascist excess as if they were different sports teams. But it’s
easy to recover the trace of meaninglessness from this seamless world—
absurdly easy, as the toy experiment proves. In effect, this stupid kids’ toy
“translated” the movie, clashing with it and altering it in its own limited
and unique way.
Objections to wind farms and solar arrays are often based on arguments that they “spoil the view.”7 The aesthetics of Nature truly impedes
ecology, and a good argument for why ecology must be without Nature.
How come a wind turbine is less beautiful than an oil pipe? How come it
“spoils the view” any more than pipes and roads? You could see turbines
as environmental art. Wind chimes play in the wind; some environmental sculptures sway and rock in the breeze. Wind farms have a slightly
frightening size and magnificence. One could easily read them as embodying the aesthetics of the sublime (rather than the beautiful). But it’s
an ethical sublime, one that says, “We humans choose not to use carbon”—a choice visible in gigantic turbines. Perhaps it’s this very visibility of choice that makes wind farms disturbing: visible choice, rather


106

The End of the World

than secret pipes, running under an apparently undisturbed “landscape”
(a word for a painting, not actual trees and water). As a poster in the
office of Mulder in the television series The X-Files says, “The Truth Is
Out There.” Ideology is not just in your head. It’s in the shape of a Coke
bottle. It’s in the way some things appear “natural”—rolling hills and
greenery—as if the Industrial Revolution had never occurred, and moreover, as if agriculture was Nature. The “landscape” look of agriculture
is the original “greenwashing.” Objectors to wind farms are not saying
“Save the environment!” but “Leave our dreams undisturbed!” World
is an aesthetic construct that depends on things like underground oil
and gas pipes. A profound political act would be to choose another
aesthetic construct, one that doesn’t require smoothness and distance
and coolness. World is by no means doing what it should to help ecological criticism. Indeed, the more data we have, the less it signifies a
coherent world.
World is a function of a very long-lasting and complex set of social
forms that we could roughly call the logistics of agriculture. New Zealand
is an astonishing place where there are fifteen sheep for every human, a
hyperbolic blowup of the English Lake District. It was deliberately manufactured that way. World is not just an idea in your head. It’s in the way
the fields roll toward a horizon, on top of which a red setting sun augurs
peace and contentment. It’s in the smooth, lawn-like texture of sheepnibbled grass: “First the labourers are driven from the land, and then
the sheep arrive.”8 Wind farms are an eyesore on this aestheticized landscape. Agriculture, in this view, is an ancient technological world-picture,
to use Heidegger’s terms: a form of framing that turns reality into so
much stuff on tap (Bestand).9 Agriculture is a major contributor to global
warming, not just because of flatulent cows, but because of the enormous
technical machinery that goes into creating the agricultural stage set, the
world. Perhaps the solution to this is suggested by the kinds of “perverse”
technologies developed by pot farmers: to create intensive growth in a
small space. Just as the porn industry accelerated the development of the
Internet, so the drug industry might be our ecological savior. Stranger
things have happened. Preserving the agricultural world picture just as it
is, however, has already become a costly disaster.


The End of the World

107

To return to an example close to New Zealand’s heart, The Lord of the
Rings presents an agricultural landscape that never explains itself. Sure,
the Rangers such as Aragorn protect it. But how does it work? For whom
and with whom is the growing and the harvesting and the selling done?
Hobbiton is constructed to induce nostalgia for a suburban future that
thinks itself as a Georgic idyll. To do so requires all kinds of lighting, rendering, and mood music—it also requires the threats of Mordor and orcs
that make us care about bland suburbia. Just changing the Wagnerian
music would destroy its delicate “balance.”
Village Homes is a world-like real illusion that rests in the northwest
area of Davis, California. Each street is named after a place or person
in The Lord of the Rings: Evenstar Lane, Bombadil Lane. The streets
are concentric yet nontopologically equivalent, so there is a real feeling
of being lost in there. There are vineyards and pomegranate trees. There
is a village-green-like space with an amphitheater built into the grass.
There is a children’s day care called Rivendell. It is all very beautiful; it’s
very well done. There is already a nostalgia for the present there, not
simply for Tolkien, but for an ecological vision of the 1970s when Village
Homes was designed. There is one slight problem: you have to have an
awful lot of money to live there. And there is a rule that you have to work
in the collective allotments. As a friend quipped, “One homeowner’s
association to rule them all.”
There are many reasons why, even if world were a valid concept altogether, it shouldn’t be used as the basis for ethics. Consider only this:
witch ducking stools constitute a world just as much as hammers. There
was a wonderful world of witch ducking in the Middle Ages in which
witches were “discovered” by drowning them, strapped to an apparatus
that submerged them in the local stream: if the supposed witch didn’t
drown, she was a witch—and should thus be burned at the stake. Witch
ducking stools constituted a world for their users in every meaningful
sense. There is a world of Nazi regalia. Just because the Nazis had a world,
doesn’t mean we should preserve it. So the argument that “It’s good because it constitutes a world” is flimsy at best. The reason not to interfere
with the environment because it’s interfering with someone’s or something’s world is nowhere near a good enough reason. It might even have


108

The End of the World

pernicious consequences. World and worlding are a dangerously weak
link in the series of late-Heideggerian concepts.10 It is as if humans are
losing both their world and their idea of world (including the idea that
they ever had a world) at one and the same time, a disorienting fact. In
this historical moment, working to transcend our notion of world is
important. Like a mannerist painting that stretches the rules of classicism
to a breaking point, global warming has stretched our world to breaking
point. Human beings lack a world for a very good reason: because no
entity at all has a world, or as Harman puts it, “There is no such thing as
a ‘horizon.’”11 The “world” as the significant totality of what is the case is
strictly unimaginable, and for a good reason: it doesn’t exist.
What is left if we aren’t the world? Intimacy. We have lost the world but
gained a soul—the entities that coexist with us obtrude on our awareness
with greater and greater urgency. Three cheers for the so-called end
of the world, then, since this moment is the beginning of history, the end
of the human dream that reality is significant for them alone. We now
have the prospect of forging new alliances between humans and nonhumans alike, now that we have stepped out of the cocoon of world.
About six minutes into Pierre Boulez’s piece Répons, the percussive
instruments come in. They surround the smoother instruments (brass,
strings), which are playing in a square in the center of the concert hall.
The percussive instruments (piano, dulcimer, harp, and so on) are processed through various delays and filters. The sound of their entry is now
evocative of speculative realism: the sound of a vaster world bursting into
the human, or the reverse, the sound of a trapdoor opening in a plane,
or the plane itself disappearing so we find ourselves in the wide blue
sky. A terrifying, wonderful sound, the Kantian sublime of inner freedom giving way to a speculative sublime of disturbing intimacy. The
sound of the end of the world but not an apocalypse, not a predictable
conclusion. The sound of something beginning, the sound of discovering yourself inside of something. Boulez himself probably thought Répons
was about the sound of modern human technology, Gesellschaft (modern “society”) impinging on Gemeinschaft (the “organic community”),
and so forth. Or the idea of a dialogue between equal partners, a dialectical play between the organic and electronic. The piece is much more


The End of the World

109

that that. It’s the sound of real entities appearing to humans. But as I’ve
been arguing, real nonhuman entities appear to humans at first as blips
on their monitors. But they are not those blips. The sound of a higherdimensional configuration space impinging on extreme Western music
(total serialism). The sound of hyperobjects. The sound of a nonmusic.
Listen to the very end: the sound echoes and reverberates, repeating glissandos; then, suddenly, it’s over. No fade out. Robert Cahen captures it
well in his deceptively simple film of Répons, visualizing the “human
sounds” as a traditional orchestral ensemble juxtaposed with revolving
and panning shots of trees, and the percussive sounds as humans mediated by a luminous ocean.12 When the percussive instruments enter, the
camera on the orchestra pans back to reveal them surrounding the other
players, and we see the studio lighting rig, as if the structures that hold
the fragile fiction of world together have evaporated. Just as most of
Earth’s surface is water, the sonic space is surrounded by the chilling,
sparkling sounds of piano, harp, and glockenspiel.
Instead of trying constantly to tweak an illusion, thinking and art and
political practice should simply relate directly to nonhumans. We will
never “get it right” completely. But trying to come up with the best world
is just inhibiting ecological progress. Art and architecture in the time
of hyperobjects must (automatically) directly include hyperobjects, even
when they try to ignore them. Consider the contemporary urge to maximize throughput: to get dirty air flowing with air conditioners. Air conditioning is now the benchmark of comfort; young Singaporeans are
starting to sweat out of doors, habituated to the homogeneous thermal
comfort of modern buildings.13 Such architecture and design is predicated
on the notion of “away.” But there is no “away” after the end of the world.
It would make more sense to design in a dark ecological way, admitting
our coexistence with toxic substances we have created and exploited.
Thus, in 2002 the architectural firm R&Sie designed Dusty Relief, an
electrostatic building in Bangkok that would collect the dirt around it,
rather than try to shuffle it somewhere else (Figures 11 and 12).14 Eventually the building would be coated with a gigantic fur coat of dirt.15
Such new ideas are counterintuitive from the standpoint of regular
post-1970s environmentalism. Process relationism has been the presiding


110

The End of the World

deity of this thinking, insofar as it thinks flows are better than solids. But
thinking this way on a planetary scale becomes absurd. Why is it better to stir the shit around inside the toilet bowl faster and faster rather
than just leaving it there? Monitoring, regulating, and controlling flows:
Is ecological ethics and politics just this? Regulating flows and sending them where you think they need to go is not relating to nonhumans.
Regulation of flows is just a contemporary mode of window dressing of
the substances of ontotheological nihilism, the becomings and processes
with which Nietzsche wanted to undermine philosophy.

Figure 11. New Territories/R&Sie, Dusty Relief (2002). By François Roche,
Stephanie Lavaux, and Jean Navarro. Contemporary architecture and design is
thinking beyond models based on vectors and flow. When one considers Earth or
the biosphere as a whole, pushing pollution “somewhere else” is only redistributing
it, sweeping it under the carpet. Reproduced by permission.


The End of the World

111

The common name for managing and regulating flows is sustainability.
But what exactly is being sustained? “Sustainable capitalism” might be one
of those contradictions in terms along the lines of “military intelligence.”16
Capital must keep on producing more of itself in order to continue to be
itself. This strange paradox is fundamentally, structurally imbalanced.
Consider the most basic process of capitalism: the turning of raw materials into products. Now for a capitalist, the raw materials are not strictly
natural. They simply exist prior to whatever labor process the capitalist
is going to exert on them. Surely here we see the problem. Whatever
exists prior to the specific labor process is a lump that only achieves definition as valuable product once the labor has been exerted on it.

Figure 12. New Territories/R&Sie, Dusty Relief (2002). By François Roche,
Stephanie Lavaux, and Jean Navarro. An electrostatic building attracts pollution
rather than redistributing it. The proposed building is an art gallery, speaking to
ways in which care for hyperobjects is now redefining the aesthetic. Reproduced
by permission.


112

The End of the World

What capitalism makes is some kind of stuff called capital. The very
definition of “raw materials” in economic theory is simply “the stuff that
comes in through the factory door.” Again, it doesn’t matter what it is.
It could be sharks or steel bolts. At either end of the process we have featureless chunks of stuff—one of those featureless chunks being human
labor. The point is to convert the stuff that comes in to money. Industrial
capitalism is philosophy incarnate in stocks, girders, and human sweat.
What philosophy? If you want a “realism of the remainder,” just look
around you. “Realism of the remainder” means that yes, for sure, there is
something real outside of our access to it—but we can only classify it as
an inert resistance to our probing, a grey goo, to adapt a term suggested
by thinking about nanotechnology—tiny machines eating everything
until reality becomes said goo.
It’s no wonder that industrial capitalism has turned the Earth into a
dangerous desert. It doesn’t really care what comes through the factory
door, just as long as it generates more capital. Do we want to sustain a
world based on a philosophy of grey goo? (Again, the term that some
futurologists use to describe the nightmare of nanoscale robots mashing
everything up into a colorless morass.) Nature is the featureless remainder at either end of the process of production. Either it’s exploitable stuff,
or value-added stuff. Whatever it is, it’s basically featureless, abstract,
grey. It has nothing to do with nematode worms and orangutans, organic
chemicals in comets and rock strata. You can scour the earth, from a
mountaintop to the Marianas Trench. You will never find Nature. It’s an
empty category looking for something to fill it.
Rather than only evaporating everything into a sublime ether (Marx
via Macbeth: “All that is solid melts into air”), capitalism also requires
and keeps firm long-term inertial structures such as families, as Fernand
Braudel explored.17 The Koch brothers and GE are two contemporary
examples. One part of capital, itself a hyperobject, is its relentless revolutionizing of its mode of production. But the other part is tremendous
inertia. And the tremendous inertia happens to be on the side of the
modern. That is, the political ontology in which there is an “away.” But
there is no “away” in the time of hyperobjects.


The End of the World

113

Capitalism did away with feudal and prefeudal myths such as the
divine hierarchy of classes of people. In so doing, however, it substituted
a giant myth of its own: Nature. Nature is precisely the lump that exists
prior to the capitalist labor process. Heidegger has the best term for it:
Bestand (standing reserve). Bestand means “stuff,” as in the ad from the
1990s, “Drink Pepsi: Get Stuff.” There is an ontology implicit in capitalist
production: materialism as defined by Aristotle. This specific form of
materialism is not fascinated with material objects in all their manifold
specificity. It’s just stuff. This viewpoint is the basis of Aristotle’s problem
with materialism. Have you ever seen or handled matter? Have you ever
held a piece of “stuff”? To be sure one has seen plenty of objects: Santa
Claus in a department store, snowflakes, photographs of atoms. But have
I ever seen matter or stuff as such? Aristotle says it’s a bit like searching
through a zoo to find the “animal” rather than the various species such
as monkeys and mynah birds.18 Marx says exactly the same thing regarding capital.19 As Nature goes, so goes matter. The two most progressive
physical theories of our age, ecology and quantum theory, need have
nothing to do with it.
What is Bestand? Bestand is stockpiling. Row upon row of big box
houses waiting to be inhabited. Terabyte after terabyte of memory waiting to be filled. Stockpiling is the art of the zeugma—the yoking of things
you hear in phrases such as “wave upon wave” or “bumper to bumper.”
Stockpiling is the dominant mode of social existence. Giant parking lots
empty of cars, huge tables in restaurants across which you can’t hold
hands, vast empty lawns. Nature is stockpiling. Range upon range of
mountains, receding into the distance. Rocky Flats nuclear bomb trigger factory was sited precisely to evoke this mountainous stockpile. The
eerie strangeness of this fact confronts us with the ways in which we still
believe that Nature is “over there”—that it exists apart from technology,
apart from history. Far from it. Nature is the stockpile of stockpiles.
What exactly are we sustaining when we talk about sustainability? An
intrinsically out-of-control system that sucks in grey goo at one end and
pushes out grey value at the other. It’s Natural goo, Natural value. Result?
Mountain ranges of inertia, piling higher every year, while humans boil


114

The End of the World

away in the agony of uncertainty. Look at Manufactured Landscapes, the
ocean of telephone dials, dials as far as the eye can see, somewhere in
China.20 Or consider the gigantic billowing waves of plastic cups created
by Tara Donovan in Untitled (Plastic Cups) (2006; Figure 13). In massive
piles, the cups reveal properties hidden from the view of a person who
uses a single cup at a time, a viscous (in my terms) malleability. In Donovan’s title, “cups” are in parentheses, the “untitled” outside parenthesis, as
if to highlight the way the cups are “saying” something beyond their
human use: something unspeakable for a human. The title of no-title
places the work both inside and outside human social and philosophical
space, like a garbage dump, an idea the gigantic pile surely evokes.
Societies embody philosophies. What we have in modernity is considerably worse than just instrumentality. Here we must depart from Heidegger. What’s worse is the location of essence in some beyond, away from
any specific existence. To this extent, capitalism is itself Heideggerian!

Figure 13. Tara Donovan, Untitled (Plastic Cups) (2006), plastic cups, dimensions
variable. A billowing cloud of plastic made of mundane cups. Donovan plays with
the disorienting way in which the human ability to calculate scale evokes strange
entities that exist as much as a single plastic cup, but that occupy a dimension
that is less available (or wholly unavailable) to mundane human perception.
Photograph by Ellen Labenski. Copyright Tara Donovan, courtesy of Pace Gallery.
Reproduced by permission.


The End of the World

115

Whether we call it scientism, deconstruction, relationism, or good-oldfashioned Platonic forms, there is no essence in what exists. Either the
beyond is itself nonexistent (as in deconstruction or nihilism), or it’s
some kind of real away from “here.” The problem, then, is not essentialism but this very notion of a beyond. This beyond is what Tara Donovan’s
work destroys.
Tony Hayward was the CEO of BP at the time of the Deepwater Horizon oil pipe explosion, and his callousness made international headlines.
Hayward said that the Gulf of Mexico was a huge body of water, and that
the spill was tiny by comparison. Nature would absorb the industrial
accident. I don’t want to quibble about the difference in size between the
Gulf and the spill, as if an even larger spill would somehow have gotten
it into Hayward’s thick head that it was bad news. I simply want to point
out the metaphysics involved in Hayward’s assertion, which we could
call capitalist essentialism. The essence of reality is capital and Nature.
Both exist in an ethereal beyond. Over here, where we live, is an oil spill.
But don’t worry. The beyond will take care of it.
Meanwhile, despite Nature, despite grey goo, real things writhe and
smack into one another. Some leap out because industry malfunctions,
or functions only too well. Oil bursts out of its ancient sinkhole and floods
the Gulf of Mexico. Gamma rays shoot out of plutonium for twenty-four
thousand years. Hurricanes congeal out of massive storm systems, fed
by the heat from the burning of fossil fuels. The ocean of telephone
dials mounts ever higher. Paradoxically, capitalism has unleashed myriad objects upon us, in their manifold horror and sparkling splendor.
Two hundred years of idealism, two hundred years of seeing humans at
the center of existence, and now the objects take revenge, terrifyingly
huge, ancient, long-lived, threateningly minute, invading every cell in
our body. When we flush the toilet, we imagine that the U-bend takes the
waste away into some ontologically alien realm.21 Ecology is now beginning to tell us about something very different: a flattened world without ontological U-bends. A world in which there is no “away.” Marx was
partly wrong, then, when in The Communist Manifesto he claimed that in
capitalism all that is solid melts into air. He didn’t see how a hypersolidity
oozes back into the emptied-out space of capitalism. This oozing real can


116

The End of the World

no longer be ignored, so that even when the spill is supposedly “gone and
forgotten,” there it is, mile upon mile of strands of oil just below the surface, square mile upon square mile of ooze floating at the bottom of the
ocean.22 It can’t be gone and forgotten—even ABC News knows that now.
When I hear the word “sustainability” I reach for my sunscreen.
The deep reason for why sustainability fails as a concept has to do
with how we are not living in a world. It is thus time to question the very
term ecology, since ecology is the thinking of home, and hence world
(oikos plus logos). In a reality without a home, without world, what this
study calls objects are what constitute reality. Objects are unique. Objects
can’t be reduced to smaller objects or dissolved upward into larger ones.
Objects are withdrawn from one another and from themselves. Objects
are Tardis-like, larger on the inside than they are on the outside. Objects
are uncanny. Objects compose an untotalizable nonwhole set that defies
holism and reductionism. There is thus no top object that gives all objects
value and meaning, and no bottom object to which they can be reduced.
If there is no top object and no bottom object, it means that we have
a very strange situation in which there are more parts than there are
wholes.23 This makes holism of any kind totally impossible.
Even if you bracket off a vast amount of reality, you will find that there
is no top and bottom object in the small section you’ve demarcated. Even
if you select only a sector of reality to study somewhere in the middle,
like they do in ecological science (the mesocosm), you will also find no
top or bottom object, even as it pertains to that sector alone. It’s like a
magnet. If you cut it, the two halves still have a north and a south pole.
There is no such thing as “half ” a magnet versus a “whole” one.
Why is holism such a bad idea? Surely there could be other possible
holisms that adopt some version of both–and thinking so that neither
the parts nor the whole—whatever the whole might be—are greater.
Perhaps the parts are not necessarily lesser than the whole but exist in
some both–and synergistic fashion; you could have—simultaneously—
“withdrawn” objects and something else (just to satisfy our modern need
for things that aren’t static, let’s say an open-ended, possibly alwaysexpanding, something else).


The End of the World

117

First, we must walk through some semirelated points about this line
of questioning. It sounds like good value to have “both–and” rather than
“either–or,” to our somewhat consumerist minds (“buy one get one free”).
But I’m afraid this is a case of either–or: holism or not. The parts are not
replaceable components of the whole. The more we open up the Russian
doll of an object, the more objects we find inside. Far more than the first
object in the series, because all the relations between the objects and
within them also count as objects. It’s what Lacanians call a not-all set.
Objects in this sense are fundamentally not subject to phallogocentric
rule. (Commercial break: If you’re having trouble with “object” at this
point, why not try another term, such as “entity”?) What we encounter
in OOO, which I have been expounding in these last couple of pages,
is a Badiou-like set theory in which any number of affiliations between
objects can be drawn. The contents of these sorts of sets are bigger than
the container.
Sometimes children’s books explore deep ontological issues. The title
of A House Is a House for Me couldn’t be better for a book about ecology
(see my observation above about oikos and logos). The text is a wonderfully jumbly plethora of objects:
Cartons are houses for crackers.
Castles are houses for kings.
The more that I think about houses,
The more things are houses for things.24

Home, oikos, is unstable. Who knows where it stops and starts? The
poem presents us with an increasingly dizzying array of objects. They
can act as homes for other objects. And of course, in turn, these homes
can find themselves on the inside of other “homes.”
“Home” is purely “sensual”: it has to do with how an object finds itself
inevitably on the inside of some other object. The instability of oikos,
and thus of ecology itself, has to do with this feature of objects. A “house”
is the way an object experiences the entity in whose interior it finds itself.
So then these sorts of things are also houses:


118

The End of the World

A mirror’s a house for reflections . . .
A throat is a house for a hum . . .
...
A book is a house for a story.
A rose is a house for a smell.
My head is a house for a secret,
A secret I never will tell.
A flower’s at home in a garden.
A donkey’s at home in a stall.
Each creature that’s known has a house of its own
And the earth is a house for us all.25

The time of hyperobjects is the time during which we discover ourselves on the inside of some big objects (bigger than us, that is): Earth,
global warming, evolution. Again, that’s what the eco in ecology originally means: oikos, home. The last two lines of A House Is a House for Me
make this very clear.
To display the poem’s effortless brio, a lot of silly, fun “houses” are presented in the penultimate section as we hurry toward the conclusion,
which then sets the record straight by talking about a “real” house, the
Earth. But this is not the case. OOO doesn’t claim that any object is “more
real” than any other. But it does discount some objects, which it calls sensual objects. What is a sensual object? A sensual object is an appearance-for
another object. The table-for my pencil is a sensual object. The table-for
my eyes is a sensual object. The table-for my dinner is a sensual object.
Sensual objects are wonderfully, disturbingly entangled in one another.
This is where causality happens, not in some mechanical basement. This
is where the magical illusion of appearance happens. A mirror’s a house
for reflections. Yes, the mesh (the interrelatedness of everything) is a sensual object! Strange strangers are the real objects! Some very important
entities that environmentalism thinks of as real, such as Nature, are also
sensual objects. They appear “as” what they are for an experiencer or user
or apprehender. They are manifestations of what Harman calls the asstructure.26 They are as-structured even though they appear to be some
deep background to (human) events.


The End of the World

119

This confusion of sensual and real, in the terms of A House Is House
for Me, is like thinking that bread really is a house for jam, and jam alone.
Rather than simply an idea that occurs to me, and perhaps to the jam,
when it finds itself slathered in there. Marmalade wants in on the bread?
Too bad, marmalade is an artificial, unnatural parasite! Peanut butter?
Illegal alien! Only jam is “natural,” such that bread is only made-forjam. See the problem with Nature? In OOO-ese, reification is precisely
the reduction of a real object to its sensual appearance-for another object.
Reification is the reduction of one entity to another’s fantasy about it.
Nature is a reification in this sense. That’s why we need ecology without Nature. Maybe if we turn Nature into something more fluid, it would
work. Emergence is also a sensual object. And thus it’s in danger of doing
the work of reifying—strangely enough, given its reputation as an unreified, flowy thing, despite its popularity as a replacement for terms such
as nature. Emergence is always emergence-for. Yet there is a deeper way
to think emergence. Physis, emergence, sway, the way a flower unfurls,
seeming, upsurge of Being, are some of the terms Heidegger uses to characterize what he considers to be the primary notion of the ancient Greek
philosophers. There is an appearing-to, an emerging-for, going on. Being
is not separated from seeming, at the most fundamental stage of Heidegger’s account. And so there is no reason why a poem can’t be construed
as a physical object in as rich a sense as you like. It’s only counterintuitive
if you think that entities come with two floors: basement mechanics and
a pretty living room on top. But for OOO, Heidegger’s terms for being
are simply elaborations on the as-structure. Whether you call it emergence or appearance, what we are talking about is a sensual object.
Thinking on a planetary scale means waking up inside an object, or
rather a series of “objects wrapped in objects”: Earth, the biosphere, climate, global warming.27 Ecological being-with does not mean dusting
some corner of an object so one doesn’t feel too dirty. Ecological beingwith has to do with acknowledging a radical uniqueness and withdrawal
of things, not some vague sludge of apeiron (using Anaximander’s term
for “the limitless”). A circle, not an endless line, is a better emblem for
the constraint, yet openness, of things.28 Indeed, the vague sludge is precisely the problem of pollution. Process relationism is simply the last


120

The End of the World

philosophical reflex of the modernity that creates the sludge. We need
a philosophy of sparkling unicities; quantized units that are irreducible
to their parts or to some larger whole; sharp, specific units that are not
dependent on an observer to make them real.
These are considerations concerning the normative value of different ontologies. But there is a deeper reason why hyperobjects are best
seen not as processes, but as real entities in their own right. Seen from a
suitably high dimension, a process just is a static object. I would appear
like a strange worm with a cradle at one end and a grave at the other,
in the eyes of a four-dimensional being. This is not to see things sub
specie aeternitatis, but as I argued previously, sub specie majoris: from a
slightly higher-dimensional perspective. Processes are sophisticated from
a lower-dimensional viewpoint. If we truly want to transcend anthropocentrism, this might not be the way to go. To think some things as
processes is ironically to reify them as much as the enemy of the process
philosopher supposedly sees things as static lumps. As static lumps go,
Lorenz Attractors are pretty cool. Processes are equally reifications of
real entities. A process is a sensual translation, a parody of a higherdimensional object by a lower-dimensional being. A hyperobject is like
a city—indeed a city such as London could provide a good example of
a hyperobject. Cities and hyperobjects are full of strange streets, abandoned entrances, cul-de-sacs, and hidden interstitial regions.
The Nuclear Guardianship movement advocates an approach to
nuclear materials that is strikingly similar to the way in which the electrostatic building simply accumulates dirt without shunting it under the
rug.29 There is no away to which we can meaningfully sweep the radioactive dust. Nowhere is far enough or long-lasting enough. What must
happen instead is that we must care consciously for nuclear materials,
which means keeping them above ground in monitored retrievable storage until they are no longer radioactive. Remember that the half-life of
plutonium-239 is 24,100 years. That’s almost as long into the future as the
Chauvet Cave paintings are in our past. The future of plutonium exerts
a causal influence on the present, casting its shadow backward through
time. All kinds of options are no longer thinkable without a deliberate
concealment of the reality of radioactive objects. Far, far more effort


The End of the World

121

must be put into monitored retrievable storage than Thomas Sebeok’s
disturbing idea of an “atomic priesthood” that enforces ignorance about
the hyperobject in question.30 The documentary Into Eternity explores
the immense challenge that the now immense heap of nuclear materials
on Earth pose to thinking and to democracy.31 The film is narrated for
a far future addressee, displacing the spurious now, which we habitually
think as a point or a small, rigid bubble.
Guardianship, care—to curate is to care for. We are the curators of
a gigantic museum of non-art in which we have found ourselves, a
spontaneous museum of hyperobjects. The very nature of democracy
and society—Whom does it contain? Only humans? Whom, if any, can
it exclude?—is thrown into question. The atomic priesthood would prevent others from knowing the truth.32 The attempt to care for hyperobjects and for their distant future guardians will strikingly change how
humans think about themselves and their relationships with nonhumans.
This change will be a symptom of a gradually emerging ecological theory and practice that includes social policy, ethics, spirituality, and art,
as well as science. Humans become, in Heidegger’s words, the guardians of futurality, “the stillness of the passing of the last god.”33 Nuclear
Guardianship has suggested encasing plutonium in gold, that precious
object of global reverence and lust, rather than sweeping it away out of
view. Encased in gold, which has the advantage of absorbing gamma
rays, plutonium could become an object of contemplation. Set free from
use, plutonium becomes a member of a democracy expanded beyond
the human. Nature as such is a byproduct of automation. By embracing
the hyperobjects that loom into our social space, and dropping Nature,
world, and so on, we have a chance to create more democratic modes
of coexistence between humans and with nonhumans. But these modes
are not discernible within traditional Western parameters, since future
generations—and further futures than that, are now included on “this”
side of any ethical or political decision.34
Nuclear Guardianship sees nuclear materials as a unit: a hyperobject.
This vision summons into human fields of thinking and action something that is already there. The summoning is to nuclear materials to join
humans in social space, rather than remain on the outside. Or better, it’s


122

The End of the World

an acknowledgment by humans that nuclear materials are already occupying social space. It’s an intrinsically scary thought. But wishing not to
think it is just postponing the inevitable. To wish this thought away is
tantamount to the cleanup operations that simply sweep the contaminated dust, garbage, and equipment away to some less politically powerful constituency. As a member of society, nuclear materials are a unit, a
quantum that is not reducible to its parts or reducible upward into some
greater whole. Nuclear materials constitute a unicity: finitude means just
this. Nuclear materials may present us with a very large finitude, but not
an infinitude. They simply explode what we mean by finitude. They are
not objective lumps limited in time and space, but unique beings.35 They
have everything that Heidegger argues is unique to Dasein.
Hyperobjects are futural, as the section “Interobjectivity” demonstrated. They scoop out the objectified now of the present moment into a
shifting uncertainty. Hyperobjects loom into human time like the lengthening shadow of a tree across the garden lawn in the bright sunshine
of an ending afternoon. The end of the world is not a sudden punctuation point, but rather it is a matter of deep time. Twenty-four thousand
years into the future, no one will be meaningfully related to me. Yet
everything will be influenced by the tiniest decisions I make right now.36
Inside the hyperobject nuclear radiation, I am like a prisoner, and a
future person is like another prisoner. We are kept strictly apart, yet I
guess his existence. There is a rumor going around the prison. If I make
a deal with the police and pin the blame for my crime on the other prisoner, and he says nothing, I can go free and he receives a longer sentence.
However, if I say nothing and he says nothing together, we both get a
minor sentence. Yet if we both betray the other, we receive an even
longer sentence. I can never be sure what the other will do. It would
be optimal if I emphasize my self-interest above all other considerations.
Yet it would be best if I act with a regard to the well-being of the other
prisoner.
This is the Prisoner’s Dilemma. In 1984 Derek Parfit published the
groundbreaking Reasons and Persons, a book that exploded long-held
prejudices about utility and ethics from within utilitarianism itself. Parfit
showed that no self-interest ethical theory, no matter how modified,


The End of the World

123

can succeed against such dilemmas.37 Specifically Parfit has in mind
hyperobjects, things such as pollution and nuclear radiation that will
be around long after anyone meaningfully related to me exists. Since in
turn my every smallest action affects the future at such a range, it is as if
with every action I am making a move in a massive highly iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma game. We might as well rename it Jonah’s Dilemma or
the Dilemma of the Interior of a Hyperobject. Default capitalist economics is rational choice theory, which is deeply a self-interest theory. Yet the
Prisoner’s Dilemma indicates we’re profoundly social beings. Even selfinterest accounts for the other somehow.
Parfit subjects an astonishing array of self-interest theories (variously
modified to include relatives, friends, neighbors, descendants, and so
on) to numerous tests based on the Prisoner’s Dilemma. The Prisoner’s
Dilemma encourages one to think about how change begins: one thinks
of the other, one brings the other into decisions that are supposedly about
one’s self-interest. To this extent the Prisoner’s Dilemma is formally collectivist even though it lacks a positive collectivist or socialist content.
The kinds of compromise necessitated by the Prisoner’s Dilemma may
strike ideological purists as weak. It is precisely this weakness that makes
the so-called compromises workable and just. Imagine a future self with
interests so different from one’s own that to some extent she or he constitutes a different self: not your reincarnation or someone else—you yourself. This person in the future is like the prisoner being interrogated in
the other room. The future self is thus unimaginably distant in one sense,
and yet hyperobjects have brought her into the adjoining prison cell. She
is strange yet intimate. The best course of action is to act with regard
to her. This radical letting go of what constitutes a self has become necessary because of hyperobjects. The weakness of this ethical position is
determined by the radical withdrawal of the future being: I can never
fully experience, explain, or otherwise account for her, him, or it. The
end of the world is a time of weakness.
The ethics that can handle hyperobjects is directed toward the unknown and unknowable future, the future that Jacques Derrida calls
l’avenir.38 Not the future we can predict and manage, but an unknowable
future, a genuinely future future. In the present moment, we must develop


124

The End of the World

an ethics that addresses what Derrida calls l’arrivant, the absolutely unexpected and unexpectable arrival, or what I call the strange stranger, the
stranger whose strangeness is forever strange—it cannot be tamed or
rationalized away. This stranger is not so unfamiliar: uncanny familiarity is one of the strange stranger’s traits. Only consider anyone who has
a long-term partner: the person they wake up with every day is the
strangest person they know. The future future and the strange stranger
are the weird and unpredictable entities that honest ecological thinking
compels us to think about. When we can see that far into the future
and that far around Earth, a curious blindness afflicts us, a blindness
far more mysterious than simple lack of sight, since we can precisely see
so much more than ever. This blindness is a symptom of an alreadyexisting intimacy with all lifeforms, knowledge of which is now thrust on
us whether we like it or not.
Parfit’s assault on utilitarian self-interest takes us to the point at which
we realize that we are not separate from our world. Humans must learn
to care for fatal substances that will outlast them and their descendants
beyond any meaningful limit of self-interest. What we need is an ethics
of the other, an ethics based on the proximity of the stranger. The decision in the 1990s, rapidly overturned, to squirrel plutonium away into
knives and forks and other domestic objects appears monstrous, and so
would any attempt to “work” it into something convenient. Hyperobjects
insist that we care for them in the open. “Out of sight, out of mind” is
strictly untenable. There is no “away” to throw plutonium in. We are
stuck with it, in the same way as we are stuck with our biological bodies. Plutonium finds itself in the position of the “neighbor” in Abrahamic
religions—that awkward condition of being alien and intimate at the
very same time.
The enormity of very large finitude hollows out my decisions from
the inside. Now every time I so much as change a confounded light bulb,
I have to think about global warming. It is the end of the world, because
I can see past the lip of the horizon of human worlding. Global warming reaches into “my world” and forces me to use LEDs instead of bulbs
with filaments. This aspect of the Heideggerian legacy begins to teeter
under the weight of the hyperobject. The normative defense of worlds


The End of the World

125

looks wrongheaded.39 The ethical and political choices become much
clearer and less divisive if we begin to think of pollution and global
warming and radiation as effects of hyperobjects rather than as flows or
processes that can be managed. These flows are often eventually shunted
into some less powerful group’s backyard. The Native American tribe
must deal with the radioactive waste. The African American family must
deal with the toxic chemical runoff. The Nigerian village must deal with
the oil slick. Rob Nixon calls this the slow violence of ecological oppression.40 It is helpful to think of global warming as something like an ultra
slow motion nuclear bomb. The incremental effects are almost invisible,
until an island disappears underwater. Poor people—who include most
of us on Earth at this point—perceive the ecological emergency not as
degrading an aesthetic picture such as world but as an accumulation of
violence that nibbles at them directly.
Without a world, there are simply a number of unique beings (farmers, dogs, irises, pencils, LEDs, and so on) to whom I owe an obligation
through the simple fact that existence is coexistence. I don’t have to run
through my worlding checklist to ensure that the nonhuman in question
counts as something I could care for. “If you answered mostly (A), then
you have a world. If you answered mostly (B), then you are poor in world
(German, weltarm). If you answered mostly (C), then you have no world
whatsoever.” What remains without a world is intimacy. Levinas touches
on it in his ethics of alterity, although he is incorrect to make this otherness as vague as the “rustling” of blank existence, the “there is” (il y a).41
The other is fully here, before I am, as Levinas argues. But the other has
paws and sharp surfaces, the other is decorated with leaves, the other
shines with starlight. Kafka writes:
At first glance it looks like a flat star-shaped spool for thread, and indeed
it does seem to have thread wound upon it; to be sure, they are only old,
broken-off bits of thread, knotted and tangled together, of the most varied
sorts and colors. But it is not only a spool, for a small wooden crossbar sticks
out of the middle of the star, and another small rod is joined to that at a
right angle. By means of this latter rod on one side and one of the points
of the star on the other, the whole thing can stand upright as if on two legs.42


126

The End of the World

“The idea that he is likely to survive me I find almost painful.”43 Kafka’s
Odradek resembles the hyperobject in this respect. Indeed we have let
him into our home somehow, like mercury and microwaves, like the
ultraviolet rays of the sun. Odradek is what confronts us at the end of the
world, not with a shout but with a breathless voice “like the rustling of
fallen leaves.”44 Things appear in their disturbing weakness and lameness,
technical terms describing the human attunement to hyperobjects that I
have begun to elucidate.
Without a world, there is no Nature. Without a world, there is no life.
What exists outside the charmed circles of Nature and life is a charnel
ground, a place of life and death, of death-in-life and life-in-death, an
undead place of zombies, viroids, junk DNA, ghosts, silicates, cyanide,
radiation, demonic forces, and pollution. My resistance to ecological
awareness is a resistance to the charnel ground. It is the calling of the
shaman to enter the charnel ground and to try to stay there, to pitch a
tent there and live there, for as long as possible. Since there are no charnel grounds to speak of in the West, the best analogy, used by some
Tibetan Buddhists (from whom the image derives), is the emergency
room of a busy hospital. People are dying everywhere. There is blood
and noise, equipment rushing around, screams. When the charm of
world is dispelled, we find ourselves in the emergency room of ecological
coexistence.
In the charnel ground, worlds can never take root. Charnel grounds
are too vivid for that. Any soft focusing begins to look like violence.
Haunting a charnel ground is a much better analogy for ecological coexistence than inhabiting a world. There is something immensely soothing about charnel grounds. It is what is soothing about Buddhism’s First
Noble Truth, the truth of suffering. Traditionally, Buddhism recognizes
three types of suffering. There is the pain of pain, as when you hit your
thumb with a hammer, and then you close your whole hand in the door
as you rush into the car to get to the doctor’s because of your thumb.
Then there is the pain of alteration, in which you experience first pleasure, then pain when pleasure evaporates. Then there is “all-pervasive
pain,” which Chögyam Trungpa beautifully describes as a “fundamental creepy quality” akin to Heidegger’s description of Angst.45 It is this


The End of the World

127

quality that comes close to the notion of world. All-pervasive pain has to
do with the fixation and confusion that constitute the Six Realms of Existence (traditionally, animals, humans, gods, jealous gods, hungry ghosts,
and hell). In paintings of the Wheel of Life, the Six Realms are held in the
jaws of Yama, the Lord of Death.
It is this outermost perspective of the jaws of death that provides
an entry point into the charnel ground. To a Buddhist, ecophenomenological arguments that base ethics on our embeddedness in a lifeworld
begin to look like a perverse aestheticization, celebrations of confusion
and suffering for confusion’s and suffering’s sake. It doesn’t really matter
what is on the TV (murder, addiction, fear, lust). Each realm of existence
is just a TV show taking up “space” in the wider space of the charnel
ground of reality, “the desert of the real.”46 Trebbe Johnson and others
have established the practice of Global Earth Exchanges, actions of finding, then giving something beautiful in a “wounded place,” such as a
toxic dump or a nuclear power facility.47 Or consider Buddhist practitioners of tonglen: “sending and taking,” a meditation practice in which
one breathes out compassion for the other, while breathing in her or his
suffering. Tonglen is now used in the context of polluted places. Consider Chöd, the esoteric ritual of visualizing cutting oneself up as a feast
for the demons, another practice that has been taken on with reference
to ecological catastrophes. Or consider the activities of Zen priests at the
Rocky Flats nuclear bomb trigger factory, such as walking meditation.
Our actions build up a karmic pattern that looks from a reified distance like a realm such as hell or heaven. But beyond the violence that
we do, it’s the distance that reifies the pattern into a world picture that
needs to be shattered. Whether it’s Hobbiton, or the jungles of Avatar, or
the National Parks and conservation areas over yonder on the hither side
of the screen (though possibly behind the windshield of an SUV), or the
fields and irrigation channels on the hither side of the wilderness—it’s all
a world picture. I’m not saying we need to uproot the trees—I’m saying
that we need to smash the aestheticization: in case of ecological emergency, break glass.
Our increasing knowledge of global warming ends all kinds of ideas,
but it creates other ones. The essence of these new ideas is the notion of


128

The End of the World

coexistence—that is after all what ecology profoundly means. We coexist with human lifeforms, nonhuman lifeforms, and non-lifeforms, on
the insides of a series of gigantic entities with whom we also coexist: the
ecosystem, biosphere, climate, planet, Solar System. A multiple series of
nested Russian dolls. Whales within whales within whales.
Consider the hypothetical planet Tyche, far out in the Oort Cloud
beyond Pluto. We can’t see it directly but we can detect evidence of its
possible existence. Planets are hyperobjects in most senses. They have
Gaussian geometry and measurable spacetime distortion because they
are so massive. They affect everything that exists on and in them. They’re
“everywhere and nowhere” up close (viscosity). (Point to Earth right
now—you have a number of options of where to point.) They are really
old and really huge compared with humans. And there’s something disturbing about the existence of a planet that far away, perhaps not even
of “our” solar system originally, yet close enough to be uncanny (a very
large finitude). And it’s unseen except for its hypothetical influence on
objects such as comets: “The awful shadow of some unseen power,” in
Shelley’s words. Tyche is a good name. It means contingency in Greek,
so it’s the speculative realism planet par excellence. (“Luck” and “chance”
are rather tame alternative translations. Tyche is what happens to you in
a tragedy if your name is Oedipus.) And for now, what could be more
obviously withdrawn?
The historic moment at which hyperobjects become visible by humans
has arrived. This visibility changes everything. Humans enter a new age
of sincerity, which contains an intrinsic irony that is beyond the aestheticized, slightly plastic irony of the postmodern age. What do I mean?
This is a momentous era, at which we achieve what has sometimes
been called ecological awareness. Ecological awareness is a detailed and
increasing sense, in science and outside of it, of the innumerable interrelationships among lifeforms and between life and non-life. Now this
awareness has some very strange properties. First of all, the awareness
ends the idea that we are living in an environment! This is so bizarre that
we should dwell on it a little. What it means is that the more we know
about the interconnection, the more it becomes impossible to posit some
entity existing beyond or behind the interrelated beings. When we look


The End of the World

129

for the environment, what we find are discrete lifeforms, non-life, and
their relationships. But no matter how hard we look, we won’t find a container in which they all fit; in particular we won’t find an umbrella that
unifies them, such as world, environment, ecosystem, or even, astonishingly, Earth.
What we discover instead is an open-ended mesh that consists of
grass, iron ore, Popsicles, sunlight, the galaxy Sagittarius, and mushroom
spores. Earth exists, no doubt, but not as some special enormous bowl
that contains all the “ecological” objects. Earth is one object coexisting
with mice, sugar, elephants, and Turin. Of course there are many scenarios in which if Earth ceased to exist, Turin and mice would be in trouble. But if the mice were shot into space aboard a friendly extraterrestrial
freighter, Earth wouldn’t be the cause of their death. Even Turin might
be rebuilt, brick by brick, on some other world.
Suddenly we discover the second astonishing thing. Mice are surely
mice no matter what we call them. But mice remain mice as long as they
survive to pass on their genome—it’s what neo-Darwinism calls satisficing. Satisficing is a performative standard for existing. And there is no
mouse-flavored DNA. There isn’t even any DNA-flavored DNA—it’s a
palimpsest of mutations, viral code insertions, and so on. There isn’t even
any life-flavored life. DNA requires ribosomes and ribosomes require
DNA, so to break the vicious cycle, there must have been an RNA world
of RNA attached to a nonorganic replicator, such as a silicate crystal. So
there is a mouse—this is not a nominalist nor is it an idealist argument.
But the mouse is a non-mouse, or what I call a strange stranger.48 Even
more weirdly: this is why the mouse is real. The fact that wherever we
look, we can’t find a mouse, is the very reason why she exists! Now we
can say this about everything in the universe. But one of the most obvious things we can say this about is a hyperobject. Hyperobjects are so
huge and so long-lasting, compared with humans, that they obviously
seem both vivid and slightly unreal, for exactly the same reasons.
Hyperobjects such as global warming and nuclear radiation surround
us, not some abstract entity such as Nature or environment or world. Our
reality has become more real, in the sense of more vivid and intense, and
yet it has also become less knowable as some one-sided, facile thing—


130

The End of the World

again, for exactly the same reasons. In Berkeley, California, in early 2011,
radiation levels in water spiked 181 times higher than normal because of
the Sendai reactor meltdowns. We know this. We know we are bathed in
alpha, beta, and gamma rays emanating from the dust particles that now
span the globe. These particles coexist with us. They are not part of some
enormous bowl called Nature; they are beings like us, strange strangers.
Should we stop drinking water? Should we stop drinking cow’s milk
because cows eat grass, which drinks rainwater? The more we know,
the harder it is to make a one-sided decision about anything. As we enter
the time of hyperobjects, Nature disappears and all the modern certainties that seemed to accompany it. What remains is a vastly more complex
situation that is uncanny and intimate at the same time.
There is no exit from this situation. Thus the time of hyperobjects is
a time of sincerity: a time in which it is impossible to achieve a final
distance toward the world. But for this very reason, it is also a time of
irony. We realize that nonhuman entities exist that are incomparably
more vast and powerful than we are, and that our reality is caught in
them. What things are and how they seem, and how we know them, is
full of gaps, yet vividly real. Real entities contain time and space, exhibiting nonlocal effects and other interobjective phenomena, writing us
into their histories. Astonishingly, then, the mesh of interconnection is
secondary to the strange stranger. The mesh is an emergent property
of the things that coexist, and not the other way around. For the modernist mind, accustomed to systems and structures, this is an astounding, shocking discovery. The more maps we make, the more real things
tear through them. Nonhuman entities emerge through our mapping,
then they destroy them.
Coexistence is in our face: it is our face. We are made of nonhuman
and nonsentient and nonliving entities. It’s not a cozy situation: it’s a
spooky, uncanny situation. We find ourselves in what robotics and CGI
designers call the uncanny valley (Figure 14). It’s a commonly known
phenomenon in CGI design that if you build figures that look too much
like humans, you are at risk of crossing a threshold and falling into the
uncanny valley (Plate 2). In the uncanny valley, beings are strangely
familiar and familiarly strange. The valley seems to explain racism quite


The End of the World

131

well, because the dehumanization suffered by victims of racism makes
them more uncanny to the racist than, say, a dog or a faceless robot.
Hitler was very fond of his dog Blondi and yet dehumanized Jews and
others. That’s the trouble with some kinds of environmentalist language:
they skip blithely over the uncanny valley to shake hands with beings
on the other side. But, as I’m going to argue, there is only another side if
you are holding on to some fictional idea of humanness, an idea that ecological awareness actually refutes. The uncanny valley, in other words, is
only a valley if you already have some quite racist assumptions about
lifeforms.
With ecological awareness there is no “healthy person” on the other
side of the valley. Everything in your world starts to slip into the uncanny

Figure 14. Masahiro Mori’s diagram of the uncanny valley. Intimacy implies the
grotesque. Since ecological awareness consists in a greater intimacy with a greater
number of beings than modernity is capable of thinking, humans must pass
through the uncanny valley as they begin to engage these beings. For reasons given
in the book, this valley might be infinite in extent.


132

The End of the World

valley, whose sides are infinite and slick. It’s more like an uncanny charnel
ground, an ER full of living and dying and dead and newly born people,
some of whom are humans, some of whom aren’t, some of whom are living, some of whom aren’t. Everything in your world starts to slip into this
charnel ground situation, including your world.
Isn’t it strange that we can admire comets, black holes, and suns—
entities that would destroy us if they came within a few miles of us—and
we can’t get a handle on global warming? Isn’t global climate now in the
uncanny valley? Doesn’t this have something to do with art? Because
when you look at the stars and imagine life on other planets, you are
looking through the spherical glass screen of the atmosphere at objects
that appear to be behind that glass screen—for all the developments since
Ptolemy, in other words, you still imagine that we exist on the inside
of some pristine glass sphere. The experience of cosmic wonder is an
aesthetic experience, a three-dimensional surround version of looking
at a picturesque painting in an art gallery. So Jane Taylor’s Romanticperiod poem “The Star” is about seeing stars through the atmosphere, in
which they seem to “Twinkle, twinkle.”
Two and a half thousand people showed up at the University of Arizona in Tucson for a series of talks on cosmology.49 Evidently there is a
thirst for thinking about the universe as a whole. Why is the same fascination not there for global warming? It’s because of the oppressive
claustrophobic horror of actually being inside it. You can spectate “the
universe” as an ersatz aesthetic object: you have the distance provided by
the biosphere itself, which acts as a spherical cinema screen. Habit tells
us that what’s displayed on that screen (like projections in a planetarium)
is infinite, distant—the whole Kantian sublime. But inside the belly of
the whale that is global warming, it’s oppressive and hot and there’s no
“away” anymore. And it’s profoundly regressing: a toxic intrauterine experience, on top of which we must assume responsibility for it. And what
neonatal or prenatal infant should be responsible for her mother’s existence? Global warming is in the uncanny valley, as far as hyperobjects
go. Maybe a black hole, despite its terrifying horror, is so far away and so
wondrous and so fatal (we would simply cease to exist anywhere near it)
that we marvel at it, rather than try to avoid thinking about it or feel grief


The End of the World

133

about it. The much smaller, much more immediately dangerous hole that
we’re in (inside the hyperobject global warming) is profoundly disturbing, especially because we created it.
Now the trouble with global warming is that it’s right here. It’s not
behind a glass screen. It is that glass screen, but it’s as if the glass screen
starts to extrude itself toward you in a highly uncanny, scary way that
violates the normal aesthetic propriety, which we know about from
philosophers such as Kant—the propriety in which there should be a
Goldilocks distance between you and the art object, not too close, not
too far away. Global warming plays a very mean trick. It comes very, very
close, crashing onto our beaches and forcing us to have cabinet meetings underwater to draw attention to our plight, and yet withdrawing
from our grasp in the very same gesture, so that we can only represent it
by using computers with tremendous processing speed.50 The whale that
Jonah is inside is a higher-dimensional being than ourselves, like twodimensional stick people relative to a three-dimensional apple. We see
that we are weak, in the precise sense that our discourse and maps and
plans regarding things are not those things. There is an irreducible gap.
Spookily, the picture frame starts to melt and extrude itself toward
us, it starts to burn our clothing. This is not what we paid twelve bucks
to see when we entered the art gallery. Human art, in the face of this
melting glass screen, is in no sense public relations. It has to actually
be a science, part of science, part of cognitively mapping this thing. Art
has to be part of the glass itself because everything inside the biosphere
is touched by global warming.


A small boy runs in front of an oncoming truck. You watch in horror as
you realize the truck can’t slow down in time. You think you should save
the boy, but you are unsure. Still, the moment compels you to act: you
rush into the street and grab the boy, yanking him out of the way just in
time. As the truck bears down on you both, you manage to half stumble,
half jump clear. The boy is safe.
You have no idea why you just did what you did. You just did it. It
seemed like the right thing to do. A certain immediacy was involved, but
you feel strange. You had no good reason to save the boy.
I walk down the same street two weeks later. Not having learned
his lesson, the same small boy runs out in front of an oncoming truck. I
think I should save him, but I’m not sure. I hesitate. I do a quick moral
calculation. I believe that ethical action is based on utility, and existing
as such is a good, so I think I should save the boy. Or the boy is related
to me: he is my cousin, or he is my doctor’s niece’s school friend. In any
case, I decide to save the boy: too late, the boy is dead.
Two weeks after that, in exactly the same spot (people wonder why
accidents happen there for years afterward), another small child, a girl,
runs out in front of another truck. A stranger is walking down the street.
She thinks she should save the girl, but she is unsure. She does a quick
series of calculations. Is the truck going so fast that it won’t be able to slow
down in time? Perhaps it can slow down. Does the truck have sufficient
134

Hypocrisies

135

momentum that even if it slowed down, it would still plough into the
girl? Is the friction of the road surface enough to weaken the truck’s inertia and bring it to a halt even though it would continue to slide toward
the girl even if the driver jammed on the breaks, all things being equal?
The stranger decides that the truck will inevitably hit the girl, and she is
correct: the truck did just hit the girl, killing her instantly.
It would be easy to confuse your actions—you are the one who just
saves the boy, without a well-formed reason—for an irrationalist “just do
it” attitude, an anti-intellectual or pseudo-Zen valuation of immediacy
over reflection, doing versus thinking. But you are very intelligent. You
know that all the reasons in the world are not enough of a reason to love.
You just save the boy, but in doing so you experience an extraordinary
feeling of uncanniness. A variation of the Talking Heads’ song “Once in
a Lifetime” springs to mind: “This is not my beautiful boy, / This is not
my beautiful street, / This is not my beautiful action.”1
Isn’t this precisely the situation we are in when confronted with hyperobjects? When it comes to global warming, finding a good reason for
tackling it may be one of the greatest factors inhibiting actually doing
anything about it. There are just not enough reasons. Global warming
is what some philosophers have called a wicked problem: this is a problem that one can understand perfectly, but for which there is no rational
solution.2 Global warming has now been labeled a super wicked problem:
a wicked problem for which time is running out, for which there is no
central authority, where those seeking the solution to it are also creating
it, and where policies discount the future irrationally.3
Utilitarianism is deeply flawed when it comes to working with hyperobjects. The simple reason why is that hyperobjects are profoundly futural.
No self-interest theory of ethical action whatsoever, no matter how extended or modified, is going to work when it comes to an object that lasts
for a hundred thousand years. There is a radical asymmetry between the
urgency and the passion and the horror that we feel when confronted
with a hyperobject that could profoundly alter life on Earth, and the sense
of cognitive weirdness and irony that we feel for exactly the same reason.
The asymmetry is very refreshing, really. Hyperobjects reduce conservatism (what does it ever conserve?) to a vague abstraction, the sliver of


136

Hypocrisies

the tip of an iceberg of false immediacy. But hyperobjects make hypocrites of us all.
The weirdness and irony derive from the fact that, to adapt a telling
idea of Søren Kierkegaard’s, “Inside the hyperobject we are always in the
wrong.”4 Doing nothing evidently won’t do at all. Drive a Prius? Why not
(I do)? But it won’t solve the problem in the long run. Sit around criticizing Prius drivers? Won’t help at all. Form a people’s army and seize
control of the state? Will the new society have the time and resources
to tackle global warming? Solar panels? They take a lot of energy to
make. Nuclear power? Fukushima and Chernobyl, anyone? Stop burning all fossil fuels now? Are we ready for such a colossal transition? Every
position is “wrong”: every position, including and especially the knowit-all cynicism that thinks that it knows better than anything else.
The “insideness” is not (simply) a physical location. Even if you go
to Mars, you have the same problem; in fact, it’s magniﬁed since you
must create a biosphere from scratch. No, this “within” the hyperobject
has to do with the way in which the hyperobject distorts my idea of time.
Recall the three timescales of global warming: the horrifying, the terrifying, and the petrifying—five hundred, thirty thousand, and one hundred
thousand years respectively. These very large finitudes collapse my clichéd
ideas of time from within. It isn’t that hyperobjects are special beings,
like an angel or a demon or a god, sent to slap my objectification of reality upside the head by hurtling me into contact with a transcendental beyond. Far from it. Hyperobjects are real things, really existing, in this
physical realm. And what they perform is far subtler and more effective
than an angel or a god, or a traditional Heideggerian, for whom the
human is the only shepherd of being, the most uncanny of the uncanny
things on Earth. Five hundred years is a “real” timescale, in the sense
that it has been measured using scientific instruments to a certain degree
of precision. Three hundred and fifty parts per million is a “real” number, real in the sense that it fits the reified view of particles occupying
points in an objective space and time. In this case, 350ppm is the upper
bound of particles of carbon compounds in air that provides for a relatively recognizable Earth for the foreseeable future. (Earth is currently
exceeding 400ppm.)


Hypocrisies

137

These numbers, these reified timescales, eat away at my reification
from within. Like aikido masters, they use my energy against itself. I
become convinced of the uncanny futurality of nonhumans, not through
some religious conversion, but through reification itself. It “sticks” much
better that way. I have not been converted to the belief in a nonobjectified beyond, but rather my prejudices have collapsed from within, through
their very objectification. Is it possible, to lapse into Heideggerese, that
hyperobjects are indeed the “last god” that appears in our world to save
us from our technological manipulation? That, precisely as Heidegger
argues, the cure for nihilism comes from within nihilism itself, from
within the reified hyperobjects we have in part created through that very
technology, whose measurements are products of the very latest, fastest,
most complex performances of that same technology (complexity theory, mapping climate using supercomputers, and particle accelerators,
for example)? This would indeed be a case of being healed by the spear
that smote you (as in Wagner’s Parsifal).5
Think of the weight of the sheer numbers with which global warming
is thrust on us: like something from a book of records, global warming is
spectated as the biggest, the most, the hugest. This “number crunching”
stance toward global warming is far from simply “scientific” or “informational,” which is not to say that this is merely a matter of “culture” or
“worldview.” Indeed, it directly embodies a philosophical stance that gave
rise to global warming in the first place. Earth and actually existing beings
that live here are bathed in a giant sea of numbers. Yet from within the
nihilism of this phenomenon, which is what Heidegger calls the gigantic—the rise of sheer quantity—emerges the “other beginning” of history,
not its end.6 The ontological, not to mention the psychic and social, economy of such an arrangement is startling. I need no special props, no deus
ex machina. I don’t need the apocalypse—indeed, as we saw in the previous section, such thoughts inhibit intimacy with the strange strangeness
of nonhumans. The trivially mathematized fact of hyperobjects’ longevity
is all the help I need. It is simply a matter of getting used to this mathematical fact—getting used to is a fair translation of the Greek mathēsis.
Derek Parfit’s main reason for writing Reasons and Persons, as I
showed in the previous section, was the existence of phenomena such


138

Hypocrisies

as nuclear radiation and pollution: hyperobjects. What to do about them?
Since no one meaningfully related to me will be living 24,100 years from
now (the half-life of plutonium), my cognitive, ethical, and political dispositions toward plutonium must transcend my self-interest, however
widely defined. Moreover, hyperobjects last so long that utilitarian concepts such as the social discount rate, a sliding scale for determining the
value of future people for present actions, cannot be ethically or even
meaningfully applied to them.7 Hyperobjects compel us to adopt attitudes for which humans are not well prepared in an age of advanced consumer capitalism.
There is a further problem with timescales concerning global warming—there are lots of them. We are dealing with an object that is not only
massively distributed, but that also has different amortization rates for
different parts of itself. Hyperobjects are messages in bottles from the
future: they do not quite exist in a present, since they scoop the standard
reference points from the idea of present time. In order to cope with
them, we require theories of ethics that are based on scales and scopes
that hugely transcend normative self-interest theories, even when we
modify self-interest by many orders of magnitude to include several generations down the line or all existing lifeforms on Earth.
Yet in transcending self-interest theories we need not throw the baby
of intimacy out with the bathwater of self. Indeed, dropping self-interest
theories involves us in what Parfit himself refers to as a more intimate
contact with other lifeforms and future selves. In a moving passage in
the middle of Reasons and Persons, a passage that is startlingly personal
compared with the blisteringly rational mode of Oxbridge utilitarianism
that his work exemplifies, Parfit writes:
Is the truth [of no-self] depressing? Some may find it so. But I find it liberating, and consoling. When I believed that my existence was [a “deep
further fact, distinct from physical and psychological continuity, and a
fact that must be all-or-nothing”], I seemed imprisoned in myself. My life
seemed like a glass tunnel, through which I was moving faster every year,
and at the end of which there was darkness. When I changed my view, the
walls of my glass tunnel disappeared. I now live in the open air. There is


Hypocrisies

139

still a difference between my life and the lives of other people. But that
difference is less. Other people are closer. I am less concerned about the
rest of my own life, and more concerned about the lives of others.8

Parfit’s words themselves exemplify the intimacy and openness to the
future that a no-self view bestows. On this view, “self ” is reduced to mere
physical and psychological continuity.
The no-self view is not a faceless, dehumanized abstraction, but a
radical encounter with intimacy. What best explains ecological awareness is a sense of intimacy, not a sense of belonging to something bigger: a sense of being close, even too close, to other lifeforms, of having
them under one’s skin. Hyperobjects force us into an intimacy with our
own death (because they are toxic), with others (because everyone is
affected by them), and with the future (because they are massively distributed in time). Attuning ourselves to the intimacy that hyperobjects
demand is not easy. Yet intimacy and the no-self view come together in
ecological awareness. The proximity of an alien presence that is also our
innermost essence is very much its structure of feeling.
Consider symbiosis, as explored by Lynn Margulis and others. One
feature of symbiosis is endosymbiosis, the fact that lifeforms do not simply live alongside us: they are within us, so much so that on many levels
the host–parasite distinction collapses. Our mitochondria are symbionts
hiding from their own catastrophe, the environmental disaster called
oxygen. Many cell walls are double, hinting at some ancient symbiotic
coupling. To a great extent others are us: or as the poet Rimbaud put
it, “Je est un autre.”9 On a nonphenomenological level (that is, one not
dependent on experience), a level an extraterrestrial with a microscope
could validate, we are strangers to ourselves. That is how close the other
is. Ecology is about intimacy.
As well as being about mind-bending time- and spatial scales, hyperobjects do something still more disturbing to our conceptual frames of
reference. Hyperobjects undermine normative ideas of what an “object”
is in the first place. This sudden turnaround has an uncanny effect.
Knowledge about radiation makes us question commonsensical ideas
about the utility and benefits of the sun. Unlike sunlight we cannot


140

Hypocrisies

directly see radiation. Yet it affects us far more intensely than visible light.
Knowledge about ozone depletion, global warming, and radiation have
turned ordinary reality into a dangerous place that Ulrich Beck calls
“risk society,” a place in which government policy now involves the distribution of risk across populations, often unevenly.10 In the long run, no
one is exempt from risk. Once we become aware of the long-term effects
of hyperobjects, we cannot abolish this awareness, and so it corrodes our
ability to make firm decisions in the present.11
The fact that we need devices such as computers and Geiger counters to see hyperobjects, objects that will define our future, is humbling
in the same way Copernicus and Galileo brought humans down to Earth
by insisting that the universe was not rotating around us.12 In their era,
“common sense” told people that the sun revolved around the earth once
a day. Common sense also assured people that weird old ladies who
proffered herbal remedies and failed to drown when thrown in water
should be burnt, because they were witches. Common sense has a lot
to answer for.
The problem of human society, wrote Jacques Lacan, is what to do
with one’s shit. Putting it this way is rather anthropocentric: many nonhumans also appear concerned about what to do with their waste.13
Hyperobjects present us with the same problem, hugely amplified. A
Styrofoam cup will take about five hundred years to biodegrade. Even
the massive density of the exponentially increasing human population
itself could be seen as a hyperobject created by leaps in agricultural technology and logistics since the eighteenth-century Agricultural Revolution, and even more so since 1945. What should we do about substances
that will be around many centuries after our culture has either radically
changed or disappeared entirely? The problem goes beyond how to dispose of human-sized things, like the stuff that gets flushed down a toilet.
What should we do about substances on whose inside we find ourselves?
So what is it indeed like, inside the hyperobject, in which we are always
in the wrong? Let us consider Lingis’s reworking of Kantian ethics. Lingis
does this by situating the transcendental a priori in what he calls the level
generated by an object, its physical grip on me, a grip that sends directives
to me. Here is Lingis’s own example, which is compelling in an ecological


Hypocrisies

141

way. You are walking through a sequoia forest in Northern California.
The gigantic trees surround you with their ancient forms. Vast networks
of lichen spread themselves around the branches. You smell smoke, and
look in the direction of the smell, to see the glowing tip of a cigarette butt
like a bright orange bead in the ferny undergrowth. You leap over toward
the ferns, parting them with your foot, and stamp on the cigarette, before
pouring water from your water bottle over the area to ensure that no fire
can start again.
It’s significant that Lingis chose the burning cigarette.14 Not only
does the ecological emergency confront us with countless moments such
as this—you leave your house and realize you left the lights on, or you
stop at a carwash and wonder whether you should turn the engine off
and swelter in the drought outside, without air conditioning. Ecological
issues more deeply present us with very pure versions of Lingis’s levels
and directives. Nonhumans, argues Lingis, tell us how to dispose ourselves toward them.15 A hammer “wants” to be held in a certain way. A
forest path issues directives to my body to walk at a particular pace,
listen for animals, avoid obstacles. A cigarette butt demands that I put it
out. These directives grip me already, before I can reflect (rationally or
not) on the right course of action. The Kantian notion of synthetic judgments presupposes the levels. The directives issue from entities that
establish zones of aesthetic causality in which I find myself caught (the
levels). These directives ground the categorical imperative, not some
decision in a void. We find ourselves thinking belatedly of how to dispose ourselves toward things.
Why do I step up to stamp out the burning cigarette? From this point
of view, free will is overrated.16 We are seduced and induced by leaves,
tennis rackets, gas pedals, and passersby. I do not find myself in a (single,
solid) world, but rather in a shifting set of zones emitted by specific
objects. The hyperobject must also emit zones that gather us in like the
tractor beam that locks onto the Millennium Falcon in Star Wars. I shall
use the term zone rather than level from now on, since to my ear zone
eliminates a sense of flatness and structure. In this notion of the emergence of time and space from an object we can begin to understand the
term zone. Zone can mean belt, something that winds around something


142

Hypocrisies

else. We talk of temperate zones and war zones. A zone is a place where
events are happening: the zone winds around, it radiates heat, bullets fly,
armies are defeated.
What action is taking place? “Not something that just is what it is, here
and now, without mystery, but something like a quest . . . a tone on its
way calling forth echoes and responses . . . water seeking its liquidity in
the sunlight rippling across the cypresses in the back of the garden.”17 If,
as suggested earlier, there is no functional difference between substance
and accidence, if there is no difference between perceiving and doing, if
there is no real difference between sentience and non-sentience, then
causality itself is a strange, ultimately nonlocal aesthetic phenomenon. A
phenomenon, moreover, that emanates from objects themselves, wavering in front of them like the astonishingly beautiful real illusion conjured
in this quotation. The sentence does what it says, casting a compelling,
mysterious spell, the spell of causality, like a demonic force field. Yet if
we knew it as simply an illusion, it would cease to waver. It would not be
an illusion at all. We would be in the real of noncontradiction. Since it is
like an illusion, however, we can never be sure: “What constitutes pretense is that, in the end, you don’t know whether it’s pretense or not.”18
A zone is not entirely a matter of “free will.” Objects are far more
threateningly autonomous, and sensually autonomous, than the Kantian
version of autonomy. Objects are, in a sense, like the temporary autonomous zone celebrated by Hakim Bey.19 The birth of a fresh object is a
“political” interruption, a revolution that changes all the other objects,
no matter how slightly.20 A zone is not studiously decided on by committee before it goes into action. Irreducibly, it is already happening. We
find ourselves in it, all of a sudden, in the late afternoon as the shadows
lengthen around a city square, giving rise to an uncanny sensation of
having been here before.
In the basement of the Chernobyl reactor, there is a gigantic “elephant’s foot” of corium, a radioactive mash of metals and glass from the
core. It cannot be seen directly, unless one wants to die quickly. The first
attempt to photograph it with a camera on wheels was a failure, because
the camera was destroyed by the emissions from this object. Eventually it had to be photographed in a mirror with the camera around the


Hypocrisies

143

corner. Objects emit zones. Wherever I find myself, a zone is already
happening, an autonomous zone, like a pair of carefully tuned sine waves
that fills a house with a crisscrossing field of interference patterns (a brief
description of La Monte Young and Marian Zazeela’s Dream House in
New York). Eliane Radigue’s astonishingly layered ARP synthesizer tones
fill a church with resonances whose lowest frequencies are felt physically as much as heard. A dissonance at that sonic depth results in the
body being physically shaken, literalizing what Adorno says about how
art shudders and shatters the subject.21 The music is not “about” the
environment: it is an environment. Biogenesis is simply a recording of
Radigue’s heartbeat, alongside which the sound of the heartbeat of the
baby in her uterus begins to be heard.22 Played through speakers capable of transmitting the bass frequencies, such as the ones used at the
33 1/3 exhibition at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art in 2003,
Biogenesis reaches into the listener’s body. Coexistence is forced on us,
whether we like it or not. With their vibrant lines, the paintings of Riley
and Napangati emit zones that grip me in their wake, unleashing powers
on my optic nerve. A human ethical or political decision is made caught
in the force fields of intermeshed zones. There is no way to find oneself
already having achieved a transcendental purchase on the zone. Kantian
synthetic judgment a priori, in which I have decided what an object is,
what object-ness is, is possible (if at all) only because I have already
found myself strafed by the zones that objects emit. The simplest cigarette butt or a child running into the street reduces every ethical or political stance to the status of hypocrisy. It is the hyperobject that forces us
to sense this hypocrisy most exquisitely. Hyperobjects are simply so large
and so long lasting that the zones that cascade from them are rich and
intense enough for us to become aware of them; and to become aware of
the irreducible gap between zone and object, which Kant calls the gap
between the phenomenon and thing.
Because of this gap, I am far from saying that we immediately encounter situations in which we know exactly what to do, as if everything
were mechanically automated. Rather, my sense of distance and irony,
my hesitation, becomes more pronounced when I find myself latched
onto a zone. It is the ontological priority of the zone that accounts fully


144

Hypocrisies

for the feeling of strangeness and belatedness in my decisions about the
object that emits it. It is simply impossible to come up with the right
reason for why I put the cigarette out in the sequoia forest. Indeed, if I
try to generate a reason, I find myself watching the cigarette burn the
undergrowth—I have already made a decision not to put out the cigarette. The zone has already grasped me in its beams. This does not mean
that I know exactly how to dispose myself relative to the zone. Far from
it: it means that I have no idea, or that I can feel the irreducible dissonance between my idea and the zone.
On what scale am I engaging the zone? Why do I put out the cigarette? Is it because I am concerned about the environment in general?
Or this tree in particular? This forest? Is it because I understand global
warming, and I see the cigarette as an indexical a sign of human ignorance, a small piece of a gigantic puzzle? Again, the zone is not a region
of direct experience, but a shifting, illusory field of irony and weirdness.
This is not Nature. This is Heidegger’s thrownness, inverted.23 I do not
find myself in any old place, a projection of my Dasein’s unique uncanniness. Everything is doing that. The uncertainty and hesitation are not
just in my Dasein, but in the tree, the rock, the cigarette butt glowing in
the ferns. My sincerity, my sensitivity to my phenomenological enmeshment in zones, is the very thing that prevents me from grasping the zone
as solid and predictable.
This doesn’t mean that I am irrevocably caught in a world of prejudices, and that this is a good thing—a common view in ecophenomenology. It means that I am caught in confusion and error and suffering, and
that this is a good thing. Embeddedness in a world, as I have argued
earlier, is no basis for ecological praxis and thinking. What the zones
mean is just the opposite. It means that no matter what my prejudices
are, no matter what “world” I feel embedded in, the zones burn through
them. Some kind of nonconceptuality burns through my prejudice,
which is exactly what hyperobjects, with their obvious futurality, surely
do. Hyperobjects are genuinely apocalyptic (from the Greek term apocaluptō) in the sense that they lift the veil of prejudice—but in so doing
they do not catapult us into a beyond. Rather they fix us more firmly to
the spot, which is no longer an embeddedness in a world.


Hypocrisies

145

The existence of zones emitted by objects is the physical reason for
Kantian beauty. Kantian beauty is a nonconceptual object-like entity that
seems to float “between” me and the object. Kant reads it as a reflection
of my a priori synthetic judgment. But in order for this aesthetic experience to arise, there must be a zone. The zone vibrates from an object
and burns through my conceptual overlay, haunting me with its strange
strangeness. The zone turns my beliefs and reifications to ash. In the case
of hyperobjects, this happens even if I am thickheadedly not well attuned
to zones. Hyperobjects are simply too vast to be ignored.
Thus, we are no longer left with a choice between a transcendental
aesthetics that guarantees the freedom of positing in an act of synthetic
judgment a priori (as Kant suggests), and a substantialist aesthetics that
crushes me with the weight of its awesome authority (as proposed by
Edmund Burke). The political implications of each aesthetic philosophy
are quite evident—we should without doubt choose the Kantian option.
Burke’s theory represents the aesthetics of the Bush administration and
their “Shock and Awe” tactics against Baghdad in the Second Iraq War.
But now we have a good, realist reason to accept a Kantian aesthetic theory, not grounded in some transcendental beyond, but right here, before
I think about it—in the zone. The zone is nonconceptual but not a blank
nothing, not a Hegelian A = A of immediacy. The zone is unspeakable
precisely because it is “in my face.” I don’t reach out to touch it—rather
the object sends it to me.
Zones are real but they are not objectively “there,” since that would
mean that they were metaphysically present, and the hyperobject poses
a serious and physical challenge to the metaphysics of presence. There
are problems with thinking this nonobjectification. How is it possible
to imagine entities that flicker and shimmer rather than remain obdurately “there”—a flickering and shimmering that post-Humean, postKantian thought and science necessitates? Yet hyperobjects seem to help
us visualize this shimmering quite efficiently. Ontotheology wants to
convince me that I must construe things as real by thinking of them as
objectively present and “there” (vorhanden, using Heidegger’s term).24
But the hyperobject prevents me from objectifying it as “real” in this
way—although it is of course real, without doubt; it seems to assail me


146

Hypocrisies

like a nightmare or a threatening circus clown. It is never vorhanden, as
it’s always disappearing behind the rain cloud, the sunburn, the pile of
garbage. The feeling of being inside a hyperobject contains a necessary
element of unreality—yet this is a symptom of its reality!
“Anything you can do, I can do meta.” Isn’t this the maxim of modernity? For two hundred years, performing intelligence has been about
saying something like “I am smarter than you to the extent that I can see
around mere objects, or through your ‘naïve’ attitude.” Being right in philosophy has most often been a case of going meta. Monty Python’s “Argument” sketch almost perfectly embodies it.25 A man walks into a faceless
bureaucratic office building that seems designed to dispense government aid of various kinds. At first he enters a room in which someone
hurls insults at him. When he tells the insulter that “I came here for an
argument,” that man apologizes: “Oh, I’m sorry, this is abuse. Arguments
are next door.” Next door, the man encounters another bureaucrat, who
refuses to engage with him. When the man announces that he is here for
an argument, the bureaucrat argues the toss with him about whether or
not he is here for an argument: immediately he goes meta.
If you’ve ever been in this type of argument, you’ll know how intense
it can get. Going meta is a great way to sneer at someone. You remove the
rug from underneath the other’s feet. Their mere immediacy is always
false. It’s the deep structure, the numinous background, the possibility
of the possibility of the horizon of the event, that is more real, better,
or just more rhetorically effective, than anything else. In this mode, the
egg of potentiality comes before the chicken of the actual. This mode is
exactly what Monty Python exploits, in particular in the “Argument”
sketch. Much of their humor is based on this meta syndrome, which tells
us something about how dominant it was in the age of British imperialism, both in its fully erect and collapsing phases.
The syndrome of going meta is repeated in countless different philosophical modes. I’m not sure which part came first, the thinking or the
acting out, but this meta syndrome seems strangely parallel with the basic
ontology of modern life. Such is the syndrome deeply responsible for
the beautiful soul condition from which we mock anyone who dares to
actually do something—the condition Lacan noted when he claimed


Hypocrisies

147

“Les non-dupes errent” (“Those who [assume they] are not duped are
making a mistake”; it is also a pun on “The name of the father,” “Le nom
du père,” and “The No of the father,” “Le non du père”).26 Those who sit
up high on the mountain looking down at us poor saps beneath, because
they think they can see through everything, are the most deluded of all.
Since, as I’ve argued, the beautiful soul is the mode of consumerism—
the default subjective framework since 1800—we can expect the meta
syndrome to be pervasive in culture.27
Hyperobjects end the world, and they end the transcendental a priori
that jumps out of the world to decide its reality. They do so not by dint
of clever arguments, nor by remaining mute and impenetrable. There is
a rhetorical mode of hyperobjects, since all objects are a form of delivery,
as we shall see. Hyperobjects don’t smack us upside the head or hit us
like Doctor Johnson’s boot, refuting Berkeley with the nonargument of
an aggressive kick. They are not prereflective, if by that we mean they
supply some immediate hotline to truth. Indeed, if the rhetorical delivery has a name, it would need to include something like an inducement
to reflection. Aristotle’s Rhetoric is a profoundly original meditation on
human affect—rhetoric is as much the art of listening as it is the art of
speaking. But to what are we listening when we attune to the hyperobject? Is this uncertainty not precisely what we are hearing? Doesn’t
the affect delivered to us in the rain, or through the weird cyclone or the
oil slick, reveal something uncanny? If it has a name, it is weirdness. Perhaps the most telling term is the word doom.
What is doom? Conventionally, doom is a decree or an ordinance:
a directive.28 Doom can also refer to judgment, law, the faculty of judging, or the final judgment that happens after the end of the world.29
Yet doom is also what we deem— opinion or discernment.30 Doom can
mean fate, destiny, and in a stronger sense, death.31 Finally, doom means
justice, or even judge, one who dispenses justice.32 Justice is a figure
that Derrida calls synonymous with deconstruction, in that it is irreducibly futural: perfect justice can never be achieved now—there is
always a remainder to come.33 A good judge doesn’t just mechanically
dole out judgments, but paradoxically enforces and suspends the law
at the same time.


148

Hypocrisies

Doesn’t this rich range of meanings suggest something about the
hyperobject? The hyperobject is indeed the bringer of fate, destiny, death.
This destiny comes from beyond the (human) world, and pronounces or
decrees the end of the world. This decree marks a decisive pivot in Earth
history in which humans discern the nonhuman and thus reckon the
fate of Earth with a greater justice. Or, just to go hog-wild Heideggerstyle for a moment, doom comes from doom and dooms doom; this
doom marks a decisive moment in which humans doom the nonhuman
and thus doom the doom of Earth with greater doom.
Each political and ethical decision is made on the inside of a hyperobject, caught in the resonance of the zones that spell doom. Even cynicism
becomes a species of hypocrisy in the grinding roar of the hyperobject.
Cynicism is the worst hypocrisy: hypocrisy squared, since cynicism is
hypocritical about its hypocrisy. The hypocrite understands that she
is caught in her own failure. The cynic still hopes that if he vomits disgustingly enough, things will change. The cynic hopes: he is not beyond
hope—he is a hypocrite. He is trying to escape doom.
Humans have entered an era of hypocrisy. Now I begin to argue that
the time of hyperobjects is a time of hypocrisy, weakness, and lameness.
I mean these terms very precisely. First we should try to understand
hypocrisy. In Greek, hypo means under, hidden, or secret, while krisis
means judgment, determination, or discernment, so we are still exploring
the contours of doom when we think about hypocrisy. Hypocrisy is a
“secret doom”: convention tells us that this means that someone is hiding something, pretending. Hypocrisy is a pretense, an act. But it is also
simply hidden doom, a message sent from somewhere obscure. Or a
message that is secret in some sense: encrypted.
Hypocrisy comes from the Greek term for delivery (hypokrisis). An
actor is a hypocrite. Remember that one sense of doom is a decree or
ordinance: that which is delivered, a statute or statement, a phrase that
stands. Delivery is the fifth aspect of traditional rhetoric (Aristotle, Quintilian): there is discovery (invention), arrangement (logic), style, memory, and delivery. Delivery is how a speech is embodied, how it is spoken,
how it comes to exist for others. Demosthenes was once quizzed about
what he thought was the most important part of rhetoric: he replied,


Hypocrisies

149

“Delivery.” Upon being asked what the second most important part was,
he replied, “Delivery”—and so on.34 Demosthenes practiced his delivery
by putting pebbles in his mouth and climbing steep hills while reciting
his speeches. Delivery is physical.
What if we flipped this around, so that we could understand that
the physical is a form of delivery? Think about it. A CD is a delivery. An
MP3 is a delivery. A vinyl record is a delivery. A cassette tape is delivery. Each one has its own physicality. Each one is an object: not some
merely neutral medium, but an entity in its own right. Now what if this
green banker’s lamp were a form of delivery? The lamp tells my eyes
about the light that its green glass diffuses. The brass base of the lamp
delivers the stem to the cherry wood desktop. The fluorescent light inside the lamp delivers the dusty photograph to me in such a way that I
can see a reflection of my typing hands in the glass in the photo frame.
We never hear the wind as such, only the wind in the chimney, the wind
in the doorway.35 The zone of one object crisscrosses with another’s in
the interobjective configuration space. Things are Aeolian, acousmatic:
their timbre (timber, substance, matter) speaks of secret strangers.36 A
thing delivers another thing. Rain, sunburn, plastic bags, and car engines
all deliver the doom of the hyperobject. They are its hypocrites. They lie
about the hyperobject; they tell secrets.
The Aeolian properties of objects are well accounted for in OOO.
OOO holds that there are real things, and that these real things are
objects, every single one. We humans are objects. The thing called a
“subject” is an object. Sentient beings are objects. Notice that “object”
here doesn’t mean something that is automatically apprehended by a
subject. There are all kinds of objects that so-called subjects don’t apprehend. Global warming existed long before human instruments started to
detect it. For millions of years oil oozed around deep under the ocean.
All kinds of objects apprehended it, of course. When we are conscious of
something, we are on a continuum with rock strata and plankton that
apprehend oil in their own way.
According to OOO, objects are Aristotelian, in some sense. One pleasant thing about OOO is that it refashions overlooked philosophy, such
as Aristotle, Al-Ghazali, Husserl, and Zubiri. What is an Aristotelian


150

Hypocrisies

object? Not a materialist one, for starters. If the first phase of my work
on ecology was ecology without Nature, this one is ecology without matter. And for the same reasons. I’ve seen wood, I’ve seen photographs of
atoms, I’ve seen clouds in diffusion chambers, I’ve seen drawings of wave
packets. Sure. But have I ever seen matter? I’m starting to think that this
thing called “matter” is like the thing called Nature or the thing called
Santa Claus—you have to say you believe in it so as not to upset the
kids. So when Mr. Spock claims to have found “matter without form,” he
is sadly mistaken.37
Don’t get me wrong here by assuming that this position in any way
advocates hostility to science. Far from it—this position is trying to
incorporate contemporary science back into philosophy to “imagine
that which we know,” as Percy Shelley succinctly puts it.38 OOO is able
to cope with the three most progressive scientific views of our age, relativity, ecology, and quantum theory. It is simply that we really shouldn’t
leave ontology to scientism. Otherwise we end up with some New Age
head-shop, lava-lamp ontology that defaults to a reductionist atomism.
In this sense, OOO begins to see beyond capitalism, if by that economic process we mean the positing of value in some mystical, ethereal beyond: the shadow world of capital. It’s not the essence that’s the
trouble, so much as the positing of it in some beyond, some distant
dimension over yonder: the metaphysical dimension of capital. With its
mistrust of appearances, Marxist ideology theory also does this. All we
poor saps can do is lament our lot, sitting around in the trashed world,
the world that isn’t even as real as the unseen one that truly determines
us. This mode of thinking is not a fine-grained sieve, but a blunt instrument that reduces everything to an unspeakable powder.
According to OOO, objects have a very interesting property. We only
see their sensual qualities, in interactions that spontaneously spawn new
objects. Me smelling an oil spill is a whole new object in the universe.
You can examine this object, as well as the oil and my nose. This object
also has special properties. What are they? Just like all objects, hyperobjects withdraw. All objects are hidden from access in some sense. No
other object, no finger, photon, or supercomputer, can possibly experience every single aspect of the object. Consider a coin. You can never see


Hypocrisies

151

the other side of the coin as the other side. When you flip it over, the
other side becomes this side. All objects are like that.
But hyperobjects make this withdrawn quality obvious. So how do
we experience them at all? People love to churn out that hackneyed
phrase, “Writing about music is like dancing about architecture.” I always
thought dancing about architecture sounded like a good idea. And in
OOO terms, this is what all objects are doing with each other. After all,
no object truly contacts another one. They really only share what Harman calls their “notes.” So architecture “columns” (or whatever it does)
about human relationships. And dogs sniff about trees (nicely, about can
also mean around). And pencils pencil about pencil sharpeners.
Imagine a world where we could only play music if we wanted to
“talk about” music. It would be like John Malkovich’s nightmare world
in Being John Malkovich, with music as Malkovich.39 Music musics about
music. Or as Joyce writes somewhere, “love loves to love love.”40 No. We
clap about music, we dance about music, we play music about music,
we write about music—all these things are not the music about which we
are performing. Alvin Lucier’s long thin wire vibrates about the people
walking through the installation.41 The storm storms concerning the
chimney it blows through (Heidegger’s nice example). The calculator
calculates concerning the bank balance I’m anxious about. Think of
how compatible OOO is with relativity. Einstein’s train trains about the
flash of lightning. The camera on the side of the track cameras about it.
Now consider quantum theory. The photon photons about the electron.
The birds bird about the BP oil slick, telling us about it in bird metaphors. And weather weathers about global warming. And writing writes
about music. Just like dancing about architecture.
Why does the rain lie about the hyperobject, while telling secrets about
it? Things get stranger still when we consider a single object—which is
why reckoning hyperobjects as objectively present (vorhanden) is simply
out of the question. Let us imagine, for the sake of argument, one single thing, alone—I know how difficult this is for us in an age in which
even Chevron tells us every day that “everything is interconnected.” One
single banker’s lamp. The banker’s lamp delivers itself. The delivery is
different from the deliverer. It is like the difference between the I that


152

Hypocrisies

is writing this, and the I about which I am writing. So that I can say the
following: “I am lying.” “This sentence is false.” Such sentences are Liars,
the most famous of which is the liar paradox: “All Cretans are liars,” says
a Cretan. The Cretan is telling the truth and lying at the same time, and
for the same reasons. The sentence is a hypocrite. It says one thing and
does another. Objects are hypocrites, actors portraying themselves. They
can’t be justly represented. They emit blue notes that differ from themselves without difference. They lie—again: “What constitutes pretense is
that, in the end, you don’t know whether it’s pretense or not.”42 Hyperobjects simply allow us to see this intrinsic, ontological level of hypocrisy,
because they are just so much larger in scale than we are, both temporally and spatially. We see signs everywhere, but not the hyperobject as
such. We see signs of doom, but the doom is nowhere objectively present. How easy it is for denialism to work its magic on Americans who are
both very insecure and very nihilistic.
Gerard Manley Hopkins writes about delivery:
Each single thing does one thing and the same:
Deals out that being each one indoors dwells;
Selves, goes itself, crying What I do is me, for that I came.43

The richly knotted vocabulary hides and tells the truth at the same time.
“Deals out”: delivers. “That being indoors each one dwells”: dwells here
seems almost transitive—the thing “dwells” a secret “being indoors,”
dealing it out—pronouncing its doom, delivering it, telling the secret
(hypocrisis). “Selves, goes itself,” like “going green,” “going berserk.” This
scholastic haecceitas (“thisness”) appears to be simply a vivid version of
the standard ontology (with “actuality” and bland substances), unless
we recall that objects are hypocrites. How can you go yourself ? You
are already yourself. You can only “go yourself ” if you are not yourself.
You must be not-yourself at the same time as being yourself. When a
thing cries, “What I do is me,” the thing is saying “This sentence is false”;
“I am lying.” The piercing blue note that the object sends out is both
major and minor, a perfect photograph and an opaque mask, a femme


Hypocrisies

153

fatale behind whose eyes is a depth of mystery or a blank void, or not
even nothing. Doom.
The hyperobject is a liar. We never see the hyperobject directly. We
infer it from graphs, instruments, tracks in a diffusion cloud chamber,
sunburn, radiation sickness, mutagenic effects, childbirth (Plate 3). We
see the shadows of the hyperobject, gigantic patches of darkness that
fleetingly slide across the landscape. We see shadows of humans engraved
on a Japanese wall. We see rain clouds, mushroom clouds, we see the
Oort Cloud at the edge of the Solar System. “The awful shadow of some
unseen power.”44 We see figments and fragments of doom.
Waking up in the shadow of the unseen power of hyperobjects is like
finding yourself in a David Lynch movie in which it becomes increasingly uncertain whether you are dreaming or awake. Humans are forced
to confront phenomenological sincerity, the truth that “there is no metalanguage.”45 Far from being a cool T-shirt slogan, such a truth makes
us extremely vulnerable. We have not traversed the curtain of illusion
into a world of certainty, even if that world is a shiny process-relational
upgrade, a happening of fluids and flows and rhizomes. The Liar sits in
the corner wearing an enigmatic half-smile, smoking a cigarette with a
look of vacancy, or is it profound depression, or just boredom—is he
even alive? Does he have a mind? What does he know about us? What
doesn’t he know? As Laurie Anderson put it in her song “Born Never
Asked,” “What is behind that curtain?”46 The play of illusion and concealment is a symptom of reality. Thus, some environmentalist rhetoric—the
scorn for mediation, the anti-intellectualism—is part of the problem, not
the solution. The further into the Great Acceleration we go, the more we
shall need to confront feelings of unreality.
Here we encounter the deep reason why inside the hyperobject we are
always in the wrong. Since we never encounter the hyperobject directly,
since we are lower dimensional than it and exist with it in an interobjective aesthetic–causal space that includes 1 + n (withdrawn) entities,
we are unable to get a purchase on it. Hyperobjects stick to us, like
melting mirrors. They leak everywhere. They undulate back and forth,
oozing spacetime all around them. They come in and out of phase with


154

Hypocrisies

our quotidian existence. They interface with us in a slightly evil-seeming
aesthetic dimension.
As I stated above, Kierkegaard argues that “against God, we are always
in the wrong.”47 It is not possible for us to attain the perfect stance toward
God. Indeed, attempting to do so might result in horrific violence or evil.
The thought that against God, we are always in the wrong, is curiously
relaxing and confidence-inspiring: we have nothing to lose. Kierkegaard
calls this feeling “edifying,” a term that is flavored with a dash of characteristically Protestant virtue. Kierkegaard’s insight is also true for the
human relationship with hyperobjects: as I wrote, inside the hyperobject,
we are always in the wrong. We are in a state of hypocrisy with regard
to hyperobjects—the hypocrisy fish eats the cynicism fish, just as the
Darwin fish eats the Jesus fish on the back of some people’s cars.
Beautiful soul syndrome, which Kierkegaard assaults remorselessly, is
the default ideological mode of modernity. The beautiful soul sees reality “over yonder,” separated from her by a thin pane of aestheticizing
glass. Beautiful me over here, corrupt world over there. The beautiful
soul is a Hegelian category, a stance toward the world that typifies the
Romantic artist—she has no inkling that she herself is formally responsible for the corruption in the world that she sees. The gaze that sees evil
“over yonder” is evil. So to get over beautiful soul syndrome is to realize
that you are a hypocrite.
Marxists will argue that huge corporations are responsible for ecological damage and that it is self-destructive to claim that we are all responsible. Marxism sees the “ethical” response to the ecological emergency
as hypocrisy. Yet according to many environmentalists and some anarchists, in denying that individuals have anything to do with why Exxon
pumps billions of barrels of oil, Marxists are displacing the blame away
from humans. This view sees the Marxist “political” response to the ecological emergency as hypocrisy. The ethics–politics binary is a true differend: an opposition so radical that it is in some sense insuperable.
Consider this. If I think ethics, I seem to want to reduce the field of
action to one-on-one encounters between beings. If I think politics, I
hold that one-on-one encounters are never as significant as the world (of
economic, class, moral, and so on), relations in which they take place.


Hypocrisies

155

These two ways of talking form what Adorno would have called two
halves of a torn whole, which nonetheless don’t add up together. Some
nice compromise “between” the two is impossible. Aren’t we then hobbled when it comes to issues that affect society as a whole—nay the biosphere as a whole—yet affect us all individually (I have mercury in my
blood, and ultraviolet rays affect me unusually strongly)?
Yet the deeper problem is that our (admittedly cartoonish) Marxist
and anarchist see the problem as hypocrisy. Hypocrisy is denounced
from the standpoint of cynicism. Both the Marxist and the anti-Marxist
are still wedded to the game of modernity, in which she who grabs the
most cynical “meta” position is the winner: Anything You Can Do, I Can
Do Meta. Going meta has been the intellectual gesture par excellence for
two centuries. I am smarter than you because I can see through you. You
are smarter than they are because you ground their statements in conditions of possibility. From a height, I look down on the poor fools who
believe what they think. But it is I who believes, more than they. I believe
in my distance, I believe in the poor fools, I believe they are deluded. I
have a belief about belief: I believe that belief means gripping something
as tightly as possible with my mind. Cynicism becomes the default mode
of philosophy and of ideology. Unlike the poor fool, I am undeluded—
either I truly believe that I have exited from delusion, or I know that no
one can, including myself, and I take pride in this disillusionment.
This attitude is directly responsible for the ecological emergency, not
the corporation or the individual per se, but the attitude that inheres
both in the corporation and in the individual, and in the critique of the
corporation and of the individual. Philosophy is directly embodied in
the size and shape of a paving stone, the way a Coca Cola bottle feels
to the back of my neck, the design of an aircraft, or a system of voting.
The overall guiding view, the “top philosophy,” has involved a cynical
distance. It is logical to suppose that many things in my world have been
affected by it—the way a shopping bag looks, the range of options on
the sports channel, the way I think Nature is “over yonder.” By thinking
rightness and truth as the highest possible elevation, as cynical transcendence, I think Earth and its biosphere as the stage set on which I prance
for the amusement of my audience. Indeed, cynicism has already been


156

Hypocrisies

named in some forms of ideology critique as the default mode of contemporary ideology.48 But as we have seen, cynicism is only hypocritical
hypocrisy.
Cynicism is all over the map: left, right, green, indifferent. Isn’t Gaian
holism a form of cynicism? One common Gaian assertion is that there is
something wrong with humans. Nonhumans are more Natural. Humans
have deviated from the path and will be wiped out (poor fools!). No one
says the same about dolphins, but it’s just as true. If dolphins go extinct,
why worry? Dolphins will be replaced. The parts are greater than the
whole. A mouse is not a mouse if it is not in the network of Gaia.49 The
parts are replaceable. Gaia will replace humans with a less defective
component. We are living in a gigantic machine—a very leafy one with
a lot of fractals and emergent properties to give it a suitably cool yet nonthreatening modern aesthetic feel.
It is fairly easy to discern how refusing to see the big picture is a form
of what Harman calls undermining.50 Undermining is when things are
reduced to smaller things that are held to be more real. The classic form
of undermining in contemporary capitalism is individualism: “There
are only individuals and collective decisions are ipso facto false.” But this
is a problem that the left, and environmentalism more generally, recognize well.
The blind spot lies in precisely the opposite direction: in how common ideology tends to think that bigger is better or more real. Environmentalism, the right, and the left seem to have one thing in common:
they all hold that incremental change is a bad thing. Yet doesn’t the case
against incrementalism, when it comes to things like global warming,
amount to a version of what Harman calls overmining, in the domain of
ethics and politics? Overmining is when one reduces a thing “upward”
into an effect of some supervenient system (such as Gaia or consciousness).51 Since bigger things are more real than smaller things, incremental steps will never accomplish anything. The critique of incrementalism
laughs at the poor fools who are trying to recycle as much as possible
or drive a Prius. By postponing ethical and political decisions into an
idealized future, the critique of incrementalism leaves the world just as
it is, while maintaining a smug distance toward it. In the name of the


Hypocrisies

157

medium-sized objects that coexist on Earth (aspen trees, polar bears,
nematode worms, slime molds, coral, mitochondria, Starhawk, and Glenn
Beck), we should forge a genuinely new ethical view that doesn’t reduce
them or dissolve them.
Cynicism is enabled by the left: “Since no one person’s action will
solve global warming, better to do nothing, or at most await the revolution to come.” As I argued above, vegetarians, Prius owners, and solar
power enthusiasts often encounter this logic. The trouble is, left cynicism maps perfectly both onto U.S. Republican do-nothing-ism and
Gaian defeatism (“Gaia will replace us, like a defective component”).
Nothing happens. Result? Global warming continues.
A Nietzschean tendency is at work within modernity. This Nietzscheanism strives for being “meta than thou.” Cynicism is nothing other
than the attitude inherent in what Heidegger calls the “ontotheological”
stance of this Nietzscheanism: pure becoming floating in the void
(nihilism).52 Holding reality at a distance, it reifies reality into an objectively present block, then it explodes the block itself. No longer serving
the purpose for which it was intended, Marxian critique is a specific
mode of this Nietzschean tendency. To assert this is by no means to suggest that there is no social reality beyond capitalism. Yet this critique
mode is not attuned to the time of hyperobjects, which brings cynicism
to an end.
How do we overcome Nietzsche? We can’t, because Nietzsche is the
high priest of overcoming. As I’ve argued elsewhere, we have to creep
lamely underneath Nietzsche and get away like that. Malcolm Bull has
written a very powerful escape manual for lame creatures who want to
exit Nietzschean modernity, entitled Anti-Nietzsche. Thinking needs to
begin to set the bar incredibly low for solidarity between humans, and
between humans and nonhumans—including non-“sentient” humans.
Otherwise we become gatekeepers of solidarity, and remain within Nietzschean ontotheology—nihilism.53
The Romantic period was the beginning of the phase in which cynicism became the highest mode of thinking. Romantic-period art writes
the manual on how to produce avant-garde products, starting an inflationary war in which successive waves of the avant-garde strive to


158

Hypocrisies

overmaster their predecessors. This movement is deeply akin to the way
in which philosophy gradually retreated into the possibility of the possibility of the possibility of . . . gradually eroding its ability to talk about
reality, a self-inflicted wound of doubt and paranoia.54
Hegel says that the Owl of Minerva—the forward movement of history, which just is the progress of thinking—flies only at dusk.55 The
Owl of Minerva has become the Oil of Minerva. Yet the Romantic
period was also the moment at which nonhuman beings emerged decisively on the human stage. Animal rights became thinkable, not simply
as a mystical practice, but as a political one. Carbon began to spread
around Earth, eventually ending up in the ice floes of the Arctic. The
counternarrative to the Romantic period and beyond is the story of how
the Oil of Minerva emerges from its invisible place in the human framing of things. The Oil of Minerva gradually convinces cynicism that it is
only a disguised form of hypocrisy. It is to this story that we now turn,
the story of how nonhumans finally convinced the most recalcitrant
humans to let them into their thinking. We have arrived at the next
moment of history, not by dint of our own efforts, but because the very
inner logic of science ran up against a limit, revealing the uncanny futurality of objects for all to see.



R
Modern life presents us with a choice between two options:
(1) The essence of things is elsewhere (in the deep structure of capital,
the unconscious, atoms, evolution, the cosmic order, and so on);
(2) There is no essence.

Philosophies, like elections, have consequences. The restriction of this
choice between these two options is one reason why Earth is in big trouble. The choice resembles having to pick between grayish brown and
brownish gray.
Yet there is a third option:
(3) There is an essence, and it’s right here, in the object resplendent with
its sensual qualities yet withdrawn.

We are entering a new era of scholarship, where the point will not be to
one-up each other by appealing to the trace of the givenness of the openness of the clearing of the lighting of the being of the pencil. Thinking
past “meta mode” will bring us up to speed with the weirdness of things,
a weirdness that evolution, ecology, relativity and quantum theory all
speak about. This weirdness resides on the side of objects themselves,
not our interpretation of them.
159

160

The Age of Asymmetry

Even Pat Robertson and Richard Dawkins must use sunscreen to
counteract the effects of ozone depletion. Hyperobjects have dragged
humans kicking and screaming (when they feel anything at all, rather
than being merely blank with denial) into an Age of Asymmetry in which
our cognitive powers become self-defeating. The more we know about
radiation, global warming, and the other massive objects that show up
on our radar, the more enmeshed in them we realize we are. Knowledge
is no longer able to achieve escape velocity from Earth, or more precisely, what Heidegger calls “earth,” the surging, “towering” reality of
things.1 The dance-on-a-volcano idealism of Romantic philosophy and
art has collapsed because we have discovered that the walls of the volcano are ever so much higher than we took them to be. We are no longer
poised on the edge of the abyss, contemplating its vastness while leaning on a walking stick, like the character in the Friedrich painting who
exemplifies the transcendental turn and the managerial power of the
bourgeoisie (Wanderer above the Sea of Fog, 1818). Instead, like Wile E.
Coyote in midair, we have discovered that we are already falling inside
the abyss, which is not pure empty space, but instead the fiery interior
of a hyperobject. Or we discover that the space we inhabit is not open
and neutral, but is the interior of a gigantic iceberg whose seeming
transparency was simply a matter of our less than adequate eyes. Flying
through the universe in the space shuttle of modernity, we find out that
we were driving with the breaks on, revving the engines while the fuselage lies rusting in a junkyard. We have woken up inside an object, like
a movie about being buried alive. It is now the uncanny time of zombies after the end of the world, a time of hypocrisy where every decision
is “wrong.”
Should we feel terrified or liberated? Both. As the black metal band
Wolves in the Throne Room say, “We are all hypocrites.”2 This is an
astonishing thing for members of Earth First! to say. If even these people
can admit that no ethical or political decision can be pure and free of
compromise in the time of hyperobjects, then we are really making some
progress. The asymmetry between action and reflection gives us a strong
feeling of the uncanny. We know more than ever before what things
are, how they work, how to manipulate them. Yet for this very reason,


The Age of Asymmetry

161

things become more, rather than less, strange. Increasing science is not
increasing demystification. The ethical asymmetry is a function of an
ontological asymmetry between humans and nonhumans.
Let’s think about a philosopher who wrote at the beginning of the
Anthropocene, when those carbon deposits were first laid down. Let’s
think about Hegel. Hegel’s history of art is pretty telling when it comes
to understanding what got us into the Anthropocene in the first place.
Hegel sees art as a conversation between what we think we know and
what materials we have at our disposal. Since what we think we know
keeps upgrading, art moves (Hegel would argue that it must move “forward,” but I’m not so sure about that), and without a reverse gear, since
we can’t unknow what we know. Hegel outlines a thoroughly teleological
history of art, in which increasing human understanding gives rise to
a transcending of art materials, and eventually to a transcending of art
itself. By “materials” he means the “subject matter” of art, the aesthetic
conventions, the paint, stone, and ink. The phases are the Symbolic, Classical, and Romantic. In the Symbolic phase, for example, a weak understanding (Hegel calls it Spirit) is dwarfed by materials. A thousand (for
Hegel, inadequate) images of Spirit proliferate as Hindu gods, fetishes,
and Buddhas: Hegel is thinking mainly of “Oriental” art.3 But in this view
a Gothic cathedral would also encapsulate the Symbolic phase: a huge
mass of stone and glass, missing the sense that the God of the “beyond”
died on the cross and is transmogrified into human being-together (the
Holy Spirit). Nonhumans seem to possess godlike powers. Stones speak,
the heavens shape human destiny.
I am not endorsing Hegel’s views, least of all his teleology, the hideand-seek game in which Spirit already knows where it is hiding, somewhere in Romantic-period Prussia. It is of great interest, this teleological
vision: it is itself a symptom of modernity. In addition to allowing us
to see something, it excludes something. What it excludes is a fourth
possibility, perfectly predictable according to the inner logic of Hegel’s
history of art (again, I do not endorse this logic), but radically unspeakable within it. There is the possibility of a postromantic, or we might say
(truly) post-modern phase, which I here call the Age of Asymmetry. How
do we get there from here?


162

The Age of Asymmetry

The Symbolic phase of art is unstable because all attitudes are unstable
for Hegel: there is a gap between the idea and the attitude that it codes
for. The attitude is the unconscious of the idea. When you figure out the
attitude, it is now included on “that” side of what you are thinking. Then
a new idea has been born, a fusion of the original idea and its accompanying attitude: the dialectical synthesis. Increasing knowledge (both practical and theoretical) increases Spirit’s understanding of its materials,
which reflects back on Spirit itself, developing its idea of itself. Thus, the
Symbolic phase collapses into the Classical phase. In the Classical phase,
there is a Goldilocks sweet spot in which there is a pleasant symmetry
between Spirit and art materials.4 A harmony emerges that a later age
can only regard as an illusion. Humans and nonhumans meet each other
halfway, generating all kinds of beautiful machinery. Mozart and Haydn
sound sweetly neoclassical, their music embodying how the nonhuman
no longer towers over the human, but the human doesn’t fully comprehend the depths of its own inner space. Art focuses on what William Blake
called “the human form divine.”5 But this “equilibrium” is actually unstable, since temporality is internal to thinking. It is not simply that customs and ideas change “in time.” It is that there is a necessary movement
within Spirit because of the gap between itself and its manifestations.
So the Classical phase collapses into the Romantic phase. Spirit’s selfunderstanding far outstrips the materials of art at this point. Philosophy
takes over the driver’s seat. In this period, humans recognize the infinite
depths of their inner space for the first time. It becomes radically impossible to embody this inner space in any nonhuman entity.6 So Romantic
art must talk about the failure to embody the inner space in outer things.
Yet by failing this way, art ironically succeeds to talk about the inner
space. Isn’t the inner space precisely what can’t be embodied? So the
job of art is to fail better, or rather, more sublimely. A truly Christian art
is now possible, because art can now express the ironic gap between
the divine idea and fallen human flesh, embodied in the incarnation of
Christ.7 So, oddly, medieval cathedrals are less Christian than a Beethoven
string quartet. From here on, art can only be about the failure of its materials to embody Spirit fully, precisely because Spirit is not reducible to
those materials. The inner infinity discovered in the Kantian sublime


The Age of Asymmetry

163

and in the poetry of Wordsworth ranges over the world of things like a
ghost in search of a destination. Art becomes deeply story-shaped, as
artists realize that since they can’t directly express Spirit, they must tell
the story of the failure to express it. Music develops into the extreme
chromaticism of Mahler, who explores every possible relationship between the notes of a tune. “Chromaticism” means the use of semitones,
the smallest possible traditional Western interval between notes.
The story of art’s failure to embody Spirit is recorded in the history
of the avant-garde, which is also bound up with the history of the failure
to change the objective social conditions of capitalism. The long march
of the “isms” is the march of one form of Romanticism after another:
Romanticism, realism, Impressionism, Expressionism . . . At the same
time, art realizes that philosophy is now its big brother. At the very least,
art needs manifestos and statements of purpose, philosophical explorations and justifications—because of its failure. We know more than we
can embody and we can’t put the genie back in the bottle.
In order to express the nonexpression of the inner life of the human,
technologies were invented such as the piano, whose massive resonant
interior can be heard when the sustain pedal is depressed. Equal temperament came to dominate modes of tuning, because it enabled music
to wander around in a consistent world, no matter how much chromaticism was employed. Now in order to attain equal temperament, you have
to detune the piano strings a little bit. The relationships between them
are not based on whole number ratios. If they were—a tuning called just
intonation—then wild dissonances and interference patterns between
sound waves would result: the wolf tones. Equal temperament fudges the
ratios a little bit. The endless journey of musical matter in search of Spirit
happens in a coherent world of equal temperament fudge, like a sepia
painting or photograph.
So, ironically, Beethovenian expressions of the rich inner life of Spirit
are bought at the price of the enslavement of nonhuman beings—piano
strings—to a system that turns them into fudge. Likewise, conductors
arose to command the orchestra like a boss commanding workers in a
factory. Gone were the genteel classical days when an orchestra conducted
itself through the agency of the lead violinist, an arrangement that rather


164

The Age of Asymmetry

elegantly expresses the Goldilocks harmony between Spirit and materials that exemplifies that earlier era.
What happens next is something like the Master–Slave dialectic that
Hegel explores in the Phenomenology of Spirit.8 The Master commands
the Slave, but by working on the Master’s things, the Slave gains power
and is eventually able to break free. But what happens next was unthinkable for Hegel. Hegel thought that art was going to be irony and inner life
from his time on out because of the gap between Spirit and materials. Art
came bundled with manifestos such as Wordsworth’s Preface to Lyrical
Ballads or Breton’s Surrealist Manifesto: a quasi-philosophical statement
of intent, which decenters the art by providing a way to think about it,
dislocated from experiencing it directly.
The Romantic period is the very advent of the Anthropocene, when
a layer of carbon is deposited by human industry throughout Earth’s top
layers of crust. It doesn’t seem like a random coincidence, the epochal
event of carbon deposits in Earth; the invention of pianos, gigantic slabs
of hollow wood wound with strings tightened with industrially made nuts
and bolts; the invention of the factory-like orchestra with its managerial
conductor; and the dominance of equal temperament, spearheaded by
the age of the piano. Equal temperament allowed the piano to dominate,
to become a general musical instrument, much like the steam engine—
recall that James Watt’s 1784 patent specified that it was a general purpose machine—as is its descendant, the universal Turing machine known
as the computer. While a steam engine can be harnessed to a wide variety
of machines (a train or loom, for example), a computer can pretend to be
any machine at all.
Yet what has happened so far during the epoch of the Anthropocene
has been the gradual realization by humans that they are not running
the show, at the very moment of their most powerful technical mastery
on a planetary scale. Humans are not the conductors of meaning, not the
pianists of the real: a truth that is common both to poststructuralist and
to speculative realist thought, despite their stated differences.
Let us explore the history of that nonhuman Romantic hero, the piano.
It was as if composers began not so much to impose their will on pianos
as become their operators, servants, or technicians, in a playful parody


The Age of Asymmetry

165

of the fate of the industrial worker, “an appendage of the machine.”9
Composers stopped listening to their inner space and started tuning to
the inner space of the piano, its physicality, its timbre. We could describe
the extreme Romanticism, shading into Expressionism, of Scriabin and
then Schoenberg, Berg, and Webern, as the way in which human inner
space was evacuated through the logic of storytelling as such. Atonal
music was a kind of Weimar Republic of sound, in which a protosocialist
democracy made all notes equal. Serialism then proceeded to reduce
the narrative sequence to an algorithmic process, a computation of patterns strictly based on the twelve-tone row.10 Žižek makes a very perceptive statement about how atonal music begins to show the shadow side of
the human self—it is paramusic, contacting the vortex of drives beneath
the dialectic of desire, releasing them as an undead sound, a spectral
materiality that no longer tells stories.11 But this was also a moment of
liberation for another physicality, a nonhuman kind. Piano strings were
beginning to be set free.
Gradually the inside of the piano freed itself from embodying the
inner life of the human being, and started to resonate with its own
wooden hollowness. There is a long yet traceable history between the
first uses of the piano sustain pedal in the Romantic period, and the long,
frightening boom from the inside of the piano at the end of The Beatles’
“A Day in the Life.”12 John Cage liberated piano strings from sounding
like a piano, by placing other objects on them, domestic items that might
surround pianos in normal circumstances, items such as rubber bands
and screws. These objects, which created the “prepared piano,” were not
meant to express Cage’s inner self; they had their own anarchic autonomy. It is as if they were allowed to occupy the inner space of the piano.
In Cage’s Sonatas and Interludes, all kinds of fresh timbres emerge from
the strings: muffled gongs, twangs, beeps. In the same way, AMM guitarist Keith Rowe constructs musical hyperobjects by allowing electric guitar strings to resonate with all kinds of sounds that are not intended by
the human operating them. Indeed, Rowe’s term for silence, which is just
a human refraining from making a sound, is un-intention, since “silence”
is only when humans stop making sounds.13 The improvisations of Rowe
allow nonhumans to jut through the art into human space.


166

The Age of Asymmetry

Then La Monte Young, a student of John Cage, took the next step. He
liberated the strings of the piano from equal temperament, reverting to
the just intonation that had been abandoned to create the Romantic
world of sepia fudge. To return the strings to just intonation was indeed
an act of justice, a “doom.” In justly tuned piano wires, we hear the doom
of wire and wood. It was Young, first of the New York Minimalists, who
used sound to end Romantic storytelling. Serialism had deconstructed
the Romantic narrative by feeding what Webern calls the Strukturklang,
the ghostly, spectral–material sound of structure as such, back into the
music. Cage had gone further and fed household objects into pianos.
Instead of coming up with a new tune, Young decided to work directly
with tuning. Young’s The Well-Tuned Piano explodes the tradition begun
by Bach’s Well-Tempered Clavier, organizing music not around a journey
but around the vibrations of strings tuned to whole number ratios, ratios
that allow ears to hear a dizzying height of crystal clear harmonics within
any one note. This is the music of attunement, not of stories. Young’s
drone music, accompanied by Marian Zazeela’s light pieces, happen for
days at a time, sometimes longer, as human voices try to tune to a sine
wave that is as pure as possible. The world of sepia, the consistency that
enables the world as such to be, is brought to an end by vibrant colors
that clash and interfere with one another, like lines in a painting by
Napangati or Riley.
A string vibrates in a piano. Since it’s tuned to whole number ratios,
the sound is clear and transparent, as if it were infinite, even though the
string itself is finite. Yet the sound is specific, colorful, vivid: far more
vivid than the topped and tailed, sepia sound of an equally tempered
string. It cannot tell a story so easily, because piano strings that are not
curtailed by equal temperament are unable to allow music to wander
in the possibility space of effortless modulation between keys, an unrestricted movement that is in direct proportion to the hobbling of the
strings themselves, like the bound feet of Chinese women. If you try to
change key, you create wolf tones, extra vibrations that oscillate wildly,
spoiling the smoothness of the possibility space. Wolf tones are named
precisely to evoke the nonhuman, the wild animal that must be domesticated to be of use.


The Age of Asymmetry

167

What are we hearing when we hear a justly tuned piano, playing the
slow single notes and clusters that Young favors? We are hearing the
piano as object, as open to its nonhumanness as is possible for humans to
facilitate. The pianist becomes the medium—in the spiritualist sense—
for the piano. Thus The Well-Tuned Piano is a cycle that is over five hours
long, defying the human mind to make a story out of it. It is a loving
work of restorative justice, allowing the piano to sound without reference to the human. Young’s previous music, in particular the sets of instructions to release a butterfly into the hall, or to push the piano until
it goes through the wall, or to push and pull tables and chairs to emit
shrieking harmonics, are algorithmic recipes for involving nonhumans in
musical space. They are more or less versions of what Cage had already
laid out in 4’ 33”, a piece designed for an open-air amphitheater. But The
Well-Tuned Piano is a deliberate attunement to a nonhuman, the most
significant musical nonhuman of the Anthropocene.
This brings us to the subject of Young’s music of attunement and
drones. Young uses sine-wave generators so accurate that they only have
an error once per calendar year. Young tries to live inside these sonic
fields for as long as possible. What are we hearing when we enter Young’s
Dream House in New York City (at 275 Church St.), where these generators create crisscrossing interference patterns that shift as we move?
We are hearing the equipment itself, we are hearing “music” that is a
tuning to the equipment, and not the other way around. Rather than
the equipment delivering the music, the music delivers the equipment.
Likewise, Young’s drone pieces are tunings, like Indian classical music,
which winds around a central motif, with the voice or the sitar trying
to attune itself to the divine. Strings and generators have been liberated
from telling a human story. They tell their own story, pronounce their
own doom.
Tuning to tuning as such: doesn’t this remind us of the loop-like quality
of meditation or contemplation, mocked in the Hegelian lineages of Western modernity as narcissistic navel gazing? For it is Hegel who above all
wants to paper over the Kantian phenomenon–thing gap. Since I can think
this gap, there is no gap—this is a too-short parody of Hegel’s idealism.
Simply allowing the gap to exist would plunge me into the night in which


168

The Age of Asymmetry

all cows are black, the dreaded pure negation of A = A. Hegel pathologizes
this loop as a primitive form of consciousness that he calls Buddhism, an
orientalist inscrutability that approaches the status of “object”—something that must be mastered, overcome, manipulated, changed. Raw
materials. Yet what is an object other than the truth of A = A, which
is strangely, spectrally in-difference, a loop that resembles “This sentence is false”? This sort of loop is not totally static, just as a night with
black cows is not totally blank or opaque: after all, there are cows in the
dark . . . An object, according to our understanding of hyperobjects, consists precisely of a rift between its appearance and its essence. Yet the
appearance of a piano string is not the appearance of a plastic bag. A
piano string is . . . a piano string: A = A. Yet this A can unleash not-A,
insofar as all kinds of high-frequency sounds that are normally suppressed in equal temperament can be coaxed from the string, if only it is
tuned according to a whole number ratio. The “equals A” is, as Derrida
remarks in a discussion of the copula, a minimal difference within A as
such, a difference that turns a self-swallowing snake into a Möbius strip.
So when modern music starts to go into a loop, beginning with late
Romanticism, what emerges is a spectral physicality denied by Hegel
and celebrated by his contemporary opponent, Schelling. The release of
the vampiric remainder of sound at first seems uncanny and horrific, but
the pure colors of Young’s just intonation are its direct descendant. The
meditative, contemplative lineage into which Young deliberately plugs,
the bhakti of devotion, in which one attunes to God in physical form (as
the guru), and via physical forms (such as drones and chanting), is the
Western descendant of Theosophy and the Victorian fascination for the
spectral as spiritual, as a parareligious realm not wedded to the Christian
narrative and the Christian love of narrativity.
Hegel’s disavowal of the richness of A = A has a long history in the
Christian suppression of its more meditative forms (demonized as “Gnoticism”). The attempt to eliminate contemplative practices in the West is
readily discernible in the history of religious interference with music. It
is significant that Pope Gregory, who developed rules for sacred music,
banned the augmented fourth, the infamous diabolus in musica. The
augmented fourth chord is considered sacred in Hindu music, precisely


The Age of Asymmetry

169

because it allows the ear to access a vast range of harmonics, a range
that evokes a hugely expanded sense of what in musical language is
called timbre: the material that generates a sound, such as the wood and
strings and open body of a sitar. What resonates in just intonation, for
example—music based on whole number harmonic intervals, such as
Indian music—is a profound range of materiality. It is like the “diabolical,” ghoulish materiality of atonal music, but colored brilliant violet,
magenta, and viridian. The singing of Sanskrit syllables, such as “OM”
(a sound that Hinduism and Buddhism associate with the material universe as such), evokes the materiality of the singing body and of the
breath that circulates within and outside that body while it remains alive.
These syllables are made to vibrate with as subtle and as profound a range
of harmonics as possible, evoking the vastness of the universe. Devotional singing, then, is a form of hyperobject, one that meets the intimacy with the other and with the distant future that hyperobjects such
as plutonium force on us.
The aesthetic realm, the realm of causality, is demonized in Western
thought: it is precisely seen as a demonic force from a beyond that is
immanent rather than outside the universe. No wonder then that there
is a connection between the vampiric sound of atonal music and the
spiritual sound of La Monte Young. Recognition of the uncanny nonhuman must by definition first consist of a terrifying glimpse of ghosts,
a glimpse that makes one’s physicality resonate (suggesting the Latin
horreo, I bristle): as Adorno says, the primordial aesthetic experience is
goose bumps.14 Yet this is precisely the aesthetic experience of the hyperobject, which can only be detected as a ghostly spectrality that comes in
and out of phase with normalized human spacetime.
We discover in the contemplative singing practices of India an expanded materialism that tunes the singer and the listener to the precise
timbre of the voice and the body, and to the resonant frequencies of the
ambience in which the music is played. In so doing, expanded materialism shows the way to bring the hyperobject into human social and philosophical space. This materialism is designed precisely to “bring the gods
to mind,” to achieve the intimacy of devotion (bhakti) that is also practiced in esoteric Buddhism.15 La Monte Young hit upon the notion of


170

The Age of Asymmetry

attending to matter in a contemplative way when he sought a radical
break with Western music in the early 1960s. Young decided that the
only way to evoke a truly new music was to stop the narrative flow that
is normative in Western music, to pull the emergency break and bring
to a shuddering halt the predictable journeys around the world of diatonic harmony and equal temperament. His Trio for Strings of 1958 is
probably the first minimalist musical composition. Hanging like monoliths in huge, gorgeous swathes of silence, the trio’s lapidary chords evoke
something more threatening, more intimate and vast, than the repetitive
riffing of the later minimalists Steve Reich and Philip Glass. It is significant that Reich and Glass have been far more successful in the bourgeois world of luxury products than Young, whose work demands a
level of passion and commitment—and free time—that would probably
embarrass and irritate, not to mention disturb, the average middle-class
concertgoer.
Young’s interest in tones as such began with a fascination with the
sound of the transformer in his turtle’s aquarium, the hum of the electrics that kept the environment habitable: the sound of the nonhuman.
And so he produced 15 VIII 65: Day of the Antler from The Obsidian
Ocelot, The Sawmill and The Blue Sawtooth High-Tension Line Stepdown
Transformer Refracting The Legend of The Dream of The Tortoise Traversing The 189/98 Lost Ancestral Lake Region Illuminating Quotients from
The Black Tiger Tapestries of The Drone of The Holy Numbers. This astonishing title is evidently a hypertitle, full of objects. Adjunct to the sonic
space traced in the piece, Young’s partner Marian Zazeela’s calligraphy
begins to reveal the tracery of unmeaning that language supposedly
transcends. Zazeela places writing in structures that employ a fourfold
bilateral symmetry, turning script into the illegible arabesque it already
is. These fractal squiggles, reminiscent of sound waves seen on oscilloscopes, mark the performance space, illuminated with magenta and blue
lights that clash in a way analogous to the way in which notes in an augmented fourth clash, producing a supersaturated abundance of radiation.
What is this music other than art in the Age of Asymmetry? In other
words, the music is a two-pronged attempt both to bring hyperobjects
into human aesthetic–causal (social, psychic, philosophical) space, and


The Age of Asymmetry

171

to open that space to the wider world, or rather to the charnel ground
after the end of the world; that is, to create a musical–social space for a
while (hours and days) in which the project of attunement to the nonhuman is performed.
Attunement is precisely how the mind becomes congruent with an
object.16 Young and Zazeela bring tuning to the forefront of art by having
the music “tune” itself, insofar as singers and instruments play a fluid
sequence of adjustments to a drone. Attunement opens the supposed here
and now of light and sound into an infinite “lightyears tracery” (Young’s
phrase), a nowness of harmonic frequencies, vibration within vibration,
the infinite in matter, on this side of things; an immanent beyond. A sonic
ecology without presence, without the present.
Singing the syllable “AH” (as Young and Zazeela do on 31 VII 69
10:26–10:49pm: Map of 49’s Dream The Two Systems of Eleven Sets of
Galactic Intervals Ornamental Lightyears Tracery, side 1 of the so-called
Black Album) involves breath, vocal chords, the air around the body,
and so on. This is not a realm of abstract presence, not a “world,” no
Gesamtkunstwerk phantasmagoria of Wagnerian “total art.” Working
directly on sound and light, on tones as such, reveals the emptiness and
vastness of timbre, its groundless difference. Young’s and Zazeela’s New
York Dream House is not natural, but super-natural, extra-natural, more
natural than natural. It is bound to its materiality.
Young’s art allows us to encounter the timbre and determinacy of
things; and at the very same time, and for the very same reasons, the
depth of things. The art object strives to attune itself to hyperobjectivity.
One of La Monte Young’s algorithmic compositions from 1960 involves
playing a chord “for as long as possible.” The future that this art opens
up is highly relevant to enabling us to cope with hyperobjects. Art in this
mode approaches an aesthetic transcendence of normative human limits, yet not as Schopenhauer predicted in his ascetic and sclerotic version
of Buddhism, an escape from samsara into a realm of soothing contemplation.17 This contemplation is hot, intense, passionate and compassionate, intimate with death and poison, staking its place in the charnel
ground, coexisting with specters and structures, with the mathēsis that
tunes human cognition to the withdrawn thing. Is this not exactly what


172

The Age of Asymmetry

we need in order to live alongside hyperobjects? We shall be playing the
game of coexistence for a very long time.
The nonhuman, already right here in social space, is finally acknowledged in the Age of Asymmetry. The nonhuman is no longer simply
an object of knowledge (calculable and predictable), but is known by
humans as a being in its own right, through a tricky ruse of reason itself,
which now knows too much about nonhumans. We only hear a limited
amount of the piano string. We only see a constrained amount of the
electromagnetic spectrum. We know that the sounds and the lights tower
into our perceptual realm through depths and heights immeasurable
to our everyday experience. Thus, we get a somewhat metaphorical, yet
vivid, taste of how all entities are profoundly withdrawn.
The Age of Asymmetry resembles the Symbolic phase, in that materials now gain a new “life.” But humans can’t unknow what they know.
We know about quarks and sine waves and Beethoven and the Anthropocene. So the Age of Asymmetry is not a return to animism as such, but
rather animism sous rature (under erasure).18 It’s called the Age of Asymmetry because within human understanding humans and nonhumans
face one another equally matched. But this equality is not like the Classical phase. There is no Goldilocks feeling in the Great Acceleration era
of the Anthropocene. The feeling is rather of the nonhuman out of control, withdrawn from total human access. We have even stopped calling nonhumans “materials.” We know very well that they are not just
materials-for (human production). We have stopped calling humans
Spirit. Sure, humans have infinite inner space. But so do nonhumans. So
does that piano note at the end of “A Day in the Life.” So the Age of
Asymmetry is also like the Romantic phase, because we have not lost the
sense of inner space. This feeling of inner space has only expanded, since
we now glimpse it in nonhumans. Some even find it in other “higher”
primates, some in all sentient beings, and some (the real weirdos such as
myself) in all beings whatsoever: eraser, black hole singularity, ceramic
knife, molasses, slug.
From within the Romantic phase, we can already begin to detect
the footprints of nonhumans in the very fact of irony, the one ingredient
that appears to suck us into the vacuum of our inner space. The default


The Age of Asymmetry

173

position of Romanticism—which has been going on from about 1776
to now—is irony. Irony is the aesthetic exploitation of gaps, or as I have
sometimes called it in undergraduate classes, gapsploitation. To be more
precise, irony is the exploitation of a gap between 1 + n levels of signification. Irony means that more than one thing is in the vicinity. Irony is
the echo of a mysterious presence. For there to be irony, something must
already be there.
We can see in this phenomenon of irony stemming from an awareness
of 1 + n levels the seeds of Romanticism’s dissolution. But this knowledge
is only available to us now in the time of hyperobjects. Recall the discussion of interobjectivity. Remember how hyperobjects point out how
things share a weird sensual space in which everything is entangled.
When you encounter a phenomenon in this sensual space, 1 + n entities
are withdrawn in order for this encounter to take place. Irony is the footprint of at least one other entity, an inner ripple, a vacuum fluctuation
that indicates the distorting presence of other beings.
So, strangely, irony has not gone anywhere, but has increased in
potency and poignancy. Irony has lost its “postmodern” (I would prefer
to say “late modern”) edge, its T-shirt sloganeering. Irony has become the
feeling of waking up inside a hyperobject, against which we are always in
the wrong. The full truth of Romantic irony, in which the narrator realizes that she is part of the story and that “there is no metalanguage,” is
fully born not in the Romantic period, surprisingly, but in the Age of
Asymmetry.19 Asymmetric irony is when we “save the Earth” but have
no idea exactly why. “They were going to make me a major for this, and
I wasn’t even in their Army anymore” (Apocalypse Now);20 or, “The vicissitudes of this life are like drowning in a glass pond.”21 Irony multiplies
everywhere, since no being’s appearance fully exhausts its essence. Irony
becomes the experience of total sincerity, of being Jonah in the whale
realizing that he is part of the whale’s digestive system, or Han Solo and
Leia inside the gigantic worm they think is the surface of an asteroid.
Consider the absurd politics of MAD (Mutually Assured Destruction) that held the world in the weird oppressive peace of the Cold War.
Behind the face-off between the United States and the Soviet Union,
do we not also glimpse an aspect of the Age of Asymmetry, in which


174

The Age of Asymmetry

humans coexist with a hyperobject, nuclear materials? Have humans not
been forced since 1945 to contemplate a world without them, not simply
in the abstract, but next week, ten years from now, in my children’s lifetime? It is hyperobjects whose presence guarantees that we are in the
next moment of history, the Age of Asymmetry. With their towering
temporality, their phasing in and out of human time and space, their
massive distribution, their viscosity, the way they include thousands of
other beings, hyperobjects vividly demonstrate how things do not coincide with their appearance. They bring to an end the idea that Nature is
something “over yonder” behind the glass window of an aesthetic screen.
Indeed, this very concept of Nature is itself a product of the Romantic
phase. Hyperobjects likewise end the idea that things are lumps of blah
decorated with accidents, or not fully real until they interact with humans.
Art in the Age of Asymmetry must thus be a tuning to the object.
Uncannily, the Platonic idea returns: art as attunement to the realm of
demons. In the Ion Socrates and the rhapsode Ion imagine art to be the
transmission of some demonic energy, as if Muse, poet, poem, rhapsode
and audience were connected like magnets.22 This really isn’t too far from
the idea of an electromagnetic field as such. Faraday and Maxwell imagined electromagnetic fields permeating the universe. The same can be said
for gravitational fields. They are never completely nullified. In addition,
one can see the Cosmic Microwave Background from the “beginning” of
the universe in TV snow. Art becomes tuning to the depth of these fields.
The existence of this field, itself a hyperobject, seriously upsets the
applecart of art as modernity defines it. Westerners have spent two centuries supposing that one could be a genius. Now the older idea of having genius (as with the Greek daimon, intermediary spirit) is returning.
Genius is no longer a production of my inner space, but a collaboration between my inner space and at least one other entity. There is
indeed something like a genius loci, we have found, not because we can
stultify ourselves and unlearn science and throw away electric engines
in favor of carts—but because we can’t. Art becomes a collaboration
between humans and nonhumans, or as Negarestani puts it, “complicity
with anonymous materials.”23 When you write a poem you are making a
deal with some paper, some ink, word processing software, trees, editors,


The Age of Asymmetry

175

and air. You have to wonder whether your poem about global warming
is really a hyperobject’s way of distributing itself into human ears and
libraries. Art becomes an attunement to the demonic: Felix Hess allows
us to hear the sound of air pressure fluctuations over the Atlantic by
recording sounds from microphones placed on a window, then speeding
up the recording to a more-than-human speed (see the section “Temporal Undulation”). Rather than “being” a genius, you “have” it, because art
is an attunement to a demonic force coming from the nonhuman and
permeating us: as we all know we have all been strafed by radiation, for
example. In Negarestani’s Cyclonopedia, the “anonymous materials” of
oil and deep geological strata spring to demonic life, as if philosophy
were a way not so much to understand but to summon actually existing
Cthulhu-like forces, chthonic beings such as Earth’s core, which Negarestani imagines as locked in conflict with a tyrannical sun, like Greek
Titans.24 In China Miéville’s Perdido Street Station, a city becomes a sentient being, while in The Scar, a floating city is made out of a gigantic
assemblage of captured ships.25
There is another reason why art becomes an attunement to the
demonic. The more we know about an object, the stranger it becomes.
Conversely, the more we know about an object, the more we realize that
what call subject is not a special thing different from what we call object.
According to evolution, I look and quack enough like a human to pass
on my DNA. This “satisficing” is enough to make me a human. A computer program looks and quacks enough like a person in a Turing Test,
which is enough to make it a person. So in turn I look and quack like a
person. Life 2.0 is possible; so “original life” is Life 1.0, artificial already.
Life is made of non-life, so that replicant molecules such as DNA, RNA,
and some silicates are neither alive nor non-alive, but rather they are
more like the undead, persisting ironically by reproducing themselves in
the very attempt to erase their disequilibrium. Eliminative materialists,
who say that this means that smaller or simpler things such as nucleotides
and quarks are more real than medium-sized things such as amoebae,
horses, and minds, are in denial about the necessarily spectral properties
of things in the Age of Asymmetry. Something about being is inherently
spooky, disturbingly uncertain. “What constitutes pretense is that, in the


176

The Age of Asymmetry

end, you don’t know whether it’s pretense or not”26 Object does not mean
objectified. Rather it means totally incapable of objectification. It’s clear
that we only ever see footprints of hyperobjects. But in some sense we
only see footprints of pencils, penguins, and plastic explosive.
Art, then, must attune itself to the demonic, interobjective space
in which causal–aesthetic events float like genies, nymphs, faeries, and
djinn. Something like a return to sensationalism or sentimentality seems
to work, with added layers of irony and weirdness, as in the movies of
David Lynch where, as Žižek observes, fire really burns and light itself
hurts your eyes, where songs are the most beautiful songs you have
ever heard and emotions passed over in daily life take on a horrifying,
uncanny hue.27
In the previous section, we saw that the time of hyperobjects is an age
of a precisely defined hypocrisy. Now we shall add to the (truly) postmodern human portfolio another specific category: weakness. Weakness
determines the capacity for tuning. Just as hypocrisy flies in the face of
a Nietzschean tendency within modernity, so weakness ends the search
for ultimate men and supermen. Modernity is like the dinosaur, rendered
extinct by some planet-scale cataclysm. Small, weak mammals crawled
out from the wreckage.
The time of hyperobjects is a time of weakness, in which humans
are tuned to entities that can destroy them: “‘Well, what’s your name?’
you ask him. ‘Odradek,’ he says. ‘And where do you live?’ ‘No fixed
abode,’ he says and laughs; but it is only the kind of laughter that has no
lungs behind it. It sounds rather like the rustling of fallen leaves.”28 Kafka
uncannily blends Nature writing (“the rustling of fallen leaves”) with a
claustrophobic indoor confrontation between a human and a nonhuman.
The figure is the same that Coleridge uses in The Rime of the Ancient
Mariner, which talks about “brown skeletons of leaves” in a way that provokes thoughts of undead beings.29 The sound of trees resonates, but not
in the expected way, to soothe or inspire a soul. Odradek, the contemporary object par excellence, is just there. We are powerless to explain
him. Yet somehow he was invited into our home. Odradek is a physical
anomaly, like a drought or an unexpected tornado, or a mutant leaf bug
with legs coming out of its eyes, born near Chernobyl. His very name has


The Age of Asymmetry

177

obscure origins: “Some say the word Odradek is of Slavonic origin, and
try to account for it on that basis. Others again believe it to be of German
origin, only influenced by Slavonic. The uncertainty of both interpretations allows one to assume with justice that neither is accurate, especially
as neither of them provides an intelligent meaning of the word.”30 When
does global warming stop and start? When did the Anthropocene begin?
The decisive dates (1784, 1945) and the vivid news stories (relating earthquakes and fires) belie the undisclosed vagueness, yet realness, of the
hyperobject. The very feeling of wondering whether the catastrophe will
begin soon is a symptom of its already having begun. Besides, hyperobjects are too viscous, too nonlocal and molten, too interobejctive to
be specified in the way we commonly think objects should be pinned
down. The properties of hyperobjects provide an open window for denialist “skeptics” who use the tricks the tobacco industry has used for years:
asserting that probability is not a guarantee of causality (even though
science is nothing more than a collection of statistically significant data).
Large, complex systems require causality theories that are not deterministic. The oppressive drive to repeat the epistemological thrills and spills
of the correlationist era by returning to Humean skepticism is itself a
symptom that the nonhumans are already here.
Consider Sheryl St. Germain’s poem “Midnight Oil,” written in response to the BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill of 2010:
how to speak of it
this thing that doesn’t rhyme
or pulse in iambs or move in predictable ways
like lines
or sentences
how to find the syntax
of this thing
that rides the tides
and moves with the tides and under the tides
and through the tides
and has an underbelly so deep and wide


178

The Age of Asymmetry

even our most powerful lights
cannot illuminate its full body
this is our soul shadow,
that darkness we cannot own
the form we cannot name
and I can only write about it at night
when my own shadow wakes me, when I can feel
night covering every pore and hair follicle, entering eyes
and ears, entering me like Zeus, a night I don’t want
on me or in me, and I dream of giving birth
to a rusty blob of a child who slithers out of me,
out and out and won’t stop slithering, growing and darkening,
spreading and pulsing between my legs
darkening into the world
what it might feel like to be a turtle, say,
swimming in the only waters you have ever known
swimming because it is the only way you move through the world
to come upon this black bile
a kind of cloying lover
a thing that looks to you
like a jellyfish, so you dive into it and try to eat it
but it covers your fins so they can’t move as before
and there is a heaviness on your carapace and head
that wasn’t there before, and you are blind
in the waters of your birth31

Notice how the poem is indented, justified to the right, not the left of
the page, as if a gigantic force had reversed the normal right–left polarity.
The poem seems to stick to a viscous object just off the edge of the righthand side of the page. Far from foregrounding the human subject’s supposed priority to things, this inversion of normal lineation truly makes
the poem a response, in the deep sense of tuning.


The Age of Asymmetry

179

Hyperobjects only make clear what is already the case: humans are
weak, since they sincerely tune to the entities that crowd around them,
unable to bootstrap themselves into the geostationary orbit of metalanguage. The inner logic of the Great Acceleration ensures that in “touching
the real” with the scanning tunneling microscope of objective presence,
humans lose track of it immediately.32 Some contemporary ecological art
tries to create cognitive maps of relationships between coexisting things.
Yet if things are somehow irreducibly withdrawn, if they have an inevitable shadow side, such cognitive maps can only skate over the surface
of things. The Age of Asymmetry ends the beautiful-soul syndrome of
modernity. It is now no longer possible to maintain the aesthetic distance
necessary for the “going meta” moves of the beautiful soul.
Romantic art exemplified by Wordsworth is the manual for the mapping approach, whose avant-garde edge is what I shall call constructivism. Constructivism views the artwork as a machine for upgrading the
mind of the viewer. The machine is complex enough and distracting
enough to unhinge one’s habitual patterns and encourage new cognitive
maps to be drawn. The map, or the compendium, of Benjamin’s convolutes (the Arcades Project), the volume with two or three columns
of prose (Derrida’s Glas), and the online text peppered with hypertext
links all derive from this Wordsworthian approach. Constructivism is
fundamentally Romantic: it gives us too much to know, and Spirit floats
free of things like a ghost. The wish of constructivism is an if-only: if
only I could displace you enough, dear reader, the world would change.
Some art objects talk directly about hyperobjects. Consider the poignant graffiti and guerilla installations of British artist Banksy. When a
child rides the mechanical dolphin in Banksy’s piece Pier Pressure, a song
plays, the familiar English “Oh I do like to be beside the seaside . . . ”;
only the dolphin is swimming in an ocean of oil. Banksy’s dolphin ride
is designed to provoke disgust and gallows humor.33 The repurposed
fairground ride is a good example of constructivism. It forces us to think.
It’s the late grandchild of Wordsworthian aesthetic strategies Likewise,
Shelley, the first Wordsworthian of the next generation, styled himself as
a hyper-Wordsworth who would do the same thing only better, and was
more committed to radical politics.


180

The Age of Asymmetry

What about art that takes the hyperobject as its form? Are there
any hyper-art-objects that perform the terrifying ooze of oil? As I argued
previously, our position vis-à-vis these objects is like trying to get closer
to the moon by running toward it, all the while forgetting that you are
on the surface of Earth. The viscosity is a direct product of increasing information. The more data we have about hyperobjects the less we
know about them—the more we realize we can never truly know them.
As we’ve seen, hyperobjects are viscous: we can’t shake them off; they
are stickier than oil and as heavy as grief. The closer we get, the less we
know. Yet we can’t break free of them no matter how far away we retreat.
We are stuck to hyperobjects, as if they enacted Sartre’s nightmare, “the
sugary death of the For-itself,” evoked when I plunge my hand into a jar
of honey.34 But it’s really much worse than that. We can’t assert a transcendental metaphysics in the face of hyperobjects. They won’t let us.
They keep getting stuck to us. It was precisely our fantasies of transcendental smoothness and presence that summoned them into being. It was
our drive to see and know everything that made us discover their oily
presence, everywhere. Modernity’s nihilism is confronted by its specter, the
nothingness of the thing.
This curious phenomenon confirms that we have entered an ecological era. A few moments ago we were delighting in our ironic free
play. Now it seems we’re stuck to the mirror. This sticking occurs as a
function of our attempt to realize the dream of progress, to see ourselves
in the mirror of the end of history. Our very attempt to achieve escape
velocity from our physical and biological being has resulted in being
stuck to Earth. Rather than the total disintegration of the subject à la
Fredric Jameson, or the vertiginous freedom of deconstruction, what we
have is the creepy awareness that we are stuck to objects forever: we can’t
un-know what we know.
Like Anansi and the Tar Baby, there is no way to break free from
hyperobjects. It becomes impossible to achieve pure detached irony. Viscosity reinforces itself in the very attempt to break free from it: we
are enmeshed in A = A, which turns out not to be the night in which all
cows are black, but a strange sticky Möbius strip. So we find ourselves
incapable of the quizzical, man-in-space postmodernism of the 1980s.


The Age of Asymmetry

181

Knowing more about hyperobjects is knowing more about how we are
hopelessly fastened to them. Hyperobjects have done what two and a half
decades of postmodernism failed to do, remove humans from the center
of their conceptual world (there’s that term again).
What we end up with is a situation in which it becomes impossible
to maintain aesthetic distance. This distance is the main factor in producing the concept Nature. So the curious phenomenon arises in which
Nature dissolves just as hyperobjects start to ooze uncannily around
us. “Objects in mirror are closer than they appear.” Viscosity is what
compels us, what puts us in the zone of the imperative (Lingis’s term).
In this zone, choice is not the protocol of moral action. The viscosity of
hyperobjects haunts us. It looms into our social, psychic, and ecological
space. Or rather, we discover that it was already looming. Ontologically
(and temporally) prior to our conceptual probing, hyperobjects are here,
like the ghosts in The Sixth Sense.
This leads us to consider an approach that is precisely the converse of
constructivism. The approach is the weird little sister of the rather masculine constructivist strategy. Let us call it the object-oriented approach.
If objects subtend their relations, not as substantial blah decorated with
accidental candy, but as sparkling realities withdrawn from access, the
constructivist approach can only go so far. The inventor of the objectoriented approach was John Keats, who exemplifies a minor tradition
within modernity, a tradition that has flirted with objects and is thus vilified as naïve, kitsch, or commodity-fetishist. When Wordsworth heard
some of Keats’s poem Endymion, he took offense, muttering sarcastically, “A very pretty piece of Paganism.” His infantilizing, feminizing
remark was right on the money. Wordsworth saw the threat. Keats had
discovered a totally new move within modern consumerist possibility
space. He was not playing in Wordsworth-space at all, the space of open
form, of complex machines that upgrade the subject. Instead, he went
straight to the object, trying not to upgrade the reader’s mind but to
melt it.
We need to get out of the persuasion business and start getting into
the magic business, or the catalysis business, or the magnetizing business, or whatever you want to call it. Using reason isn’t wrong. But with


182

The Age of Asymmetry

objects this huge, this massively distributed, this counterintuitive, this
transdimensional, it’s not enough simply to use art as candy coating on
top of facts. We can’t just be in the PR business. Percy Shelley put it
beautifully when he wrote, “We [lack] the creative faculty to imagine
that which we know.”35 That was back in 1820, and it’s only gotten worse.
Consider the heavy hydrocarbons that subtend the soil of the Lago Agrio
oil field in Ecuador, a black fudge hyperobject that oozes into drinking
water, with unknown and under-studied mutagenic and carcinogenic
effects. We do not need to keep on parsing the data like Chevron, the
defendants in the lawsuit on behalf of the people affected by the contaminated soil. Such parsing of data would be using the very same tactic as the gigantic corporation, the strategy of producing endless maps
and graphs.
What we need is more like what Judge Nicolás Zambrano finally did
in the case, which was to suspend the endless construction of (necessarily incomplete statistical) data, and specify that precisely because there is
a gap in our knowledge—what do these heavy hydrocarbons do exactly?—
to determine that the best action is to act as if the threat were real. To
specify them not as assemblages of relations but as a unit, as an entity
with unknown powers, a unique entity consisting of all kinds of other
entities, all kinds of complex hyrocarbons, but an entity nonetheless,
just like any other in its Tardis-like inconsistency. To respect the Kantian
gap between phenomenon and thing on which modernity and modern
science is based. And yet to respect it still more than the deniers, who
endlessly look for more data, more proof. This is a philosophical war, a
war that Blake calls a “mental fight.”36 The tactic of Judge Zambrano was
in effect to specify the oil as an entity in its own right rather than as an
assemblage or set of relations: an object-oriented tactic. Precisely because
the hyperobject is withdrawn—it is mathematizable to humans as reams
and reams of data—its appearance is in doubt: its appearance as cancer,
its appearance as sores covering the body of a newborn baby.37 And for
precisely this reason, precaution must be the guiding principle. No further proof is required, since the search for proof is already contaminated
by an unwillingness to acknowledge the hyperobject, an unwillingness
we may readily call denial.


The Age of Asymmetry

183

The burden of proof is shifted to the defendant: Chevron must now
prove that oil does not have a harmful effect.38 This is a judo move within
a post-Humean age in which scientific causality just is statistical. Toxicity is a category that emerges from the Humean science of statistical
causality. You can’t directly specify it since there is no single criterion for
it—its object withdraws, yet every day we see people dying of cancer from
the mutagenic effects of radiation and hydrocarbons. Moreover, only
about twenty-five of the thousands of hydrocarbons in existence on Earth
have been studied as to their toxic effects. So Chevron can parsimoniously claim that there is no proof. Figuring out exactly what the causal
links are, even if possible, would result in further delay and further damage to nonhuman and human life. It is like Lingis and the cigarette in the
sequoia forest. Reasoning as the search for proof only delays, and its net
effect is denial. This doesn’t mean that a cigarette is an umbrella, or that
the effects of heavy aromatic hydrocarbons are to cause cotton candy to
sprout on banana trees. It means that things are liars who tell the truth,
like “This sentence is false”; the larger the things are, the more obvious
this feature becomes. Ethics and politics in a post-modern age after Hume
and Kant must be based in attunement to directives coming from entities, which boils down to accepting and listening to true lies. Any ethical
or political decision thus feels like an uncanny leap into a void, where we
are unsure of ourselves, precisely because there is so much data.
The trouble with the PR approach, or the reason-only approach (its
twin in some ways), is that human beings are currently in the denial
phase of grief regarding their role in the Anthropocene. It’s too much
to take in at once. Not only are we waking up inside of a gigantic object,
like finding ourselves in the womb again, but a toxic womb—but we are
responsible for it. And we know that really we are responsible simply
because we can understand what global warming is. We don’t really need
reasons—reasons inhibit our responsible action, or seriously delay it.
No neonatal or prenatal infant is responsible for her mother’s toxic body.
Yet that is the situation we find ourselves in—on the one hand terrifyingly regressing, on the other hand, enragingly implicating. It’s like the
joke about the man who ended up in an asylum as he was paranoid that
he was being stalked by a gigantic chicken. Upon being released, he


184

The Age of Asymmetry

returns a few weeks later, sweating and terrified. The chief psychiatrist
tries to reassure him: “But you know that there is no chicken.” “I know
that,” says the man—“But try telling that to the chicken.” The urgent
question of our age is, how do we convince the chicken—in particular, the American chicken—that she doesn’t exist? In other words, how
do we talk to the unconscious? Reasoning on and on is a symptom of
how people are still not ready to go through an affective experience that
would existentially and politically bind them to hyperobjects, to care
for them. We need art that does not make people think (we have quite
enough environmental art that does that), but rather that walks them
through an inner space that is hard to traverse.
What is required, then, is to renew the object-oriented approach
pioneered by Keats. Drop or supplement the Nature strategy—why is
constructivism a Nature strategy in the lineage of Rodchenko and Naum
Gabo? Because Nature art creates machines that change attitudes, paradoxical devices that upgrade human consciousness, changing people’s
relations with one another and with nonhumans. Their raw material is
the viewer’s or reader’s conceptual mind. Why? Because Wordsworth,
“poet of Nature,” as Shelley calls him, wrote the manual on this strategy. This affects all kinds of art practice including concept art and performance art, and even agriculture as performance art (as in the work of
Wendell Berry). The art object as geographical text. You think you know
what Nature is—all it requires is some good PR. You get into the convincing business. You are working in the configuration space of advertising. To many, dropping the Nature–constructivist approach in favor
of an object-oriented approach will look like an abandonment of Nature.
It is—but it is by no means an abandonment of Earth or of things in their
weird vibrancy. Far from it. Let’s consider some examples.
The sound art of Francisco Lopez evokes the hyperobject in an objectoriented way. La Selva is an immensely powerful example.39 Lopez
achieved it by using simple equipment: place just two good mikes in
the Amazon jungle, hit record, stop. The result is far from an ambient
rendering or simulation of the real. By using loops and careful equalization, recordings of Nature tend to evoke a comforting sense of being
surrounded. What we hear in La Selva is a threatening, solid wedge of


The Age of Asymmetry

185

sound. Lopez summons the jungle as a discrete unit, a quantum incapable of being divided further. Since there are real objects, I contend,
some metaphors for them are better than others—and Lopez’s translation of the jungle into MP3 form is an excellent translation, based at any
rate on my personal experience of the Amazon rainforest. In the jungle,
lifeforms abolish all sense of aesthetic distance. They are in your face—
you need to keep them away, frequently, to avoid fatal disease. The temperature is roughly human body temperature, constantly, so it becomes
hard at the level of deep sensation to maintain a boundary between where
one’s skin stops and where the rainforest starts. And the jungle as a unit
is present—this is not to argue that it’s a whole that is greater than the
sum of its parts (a Gaian whimsy). You do not experience the jungle as
a gigantic benevolent machine made of tiny replaceable components.
Rather, the jungle is an entity that comes right up to your skin and penetrates it, beaming through you like x-rays. Lopez forces us to confront
the rainforest in this manner.
Consider Robert Ashley’s She Was a Visitor.40 Ashley intones the
phrase “She was a visitor” into a microphone. The audience begins to
pronounce whatever phoneme of the phrase an individual chooses. The
piece becomes a massively distributed pronunciation of “She was a visitor,” split into sonic chunks. It spine chillingly captures the alien presence of the strange stranger, the notion of entities as irreducibly uncanny.
There is an echo of the Greek tragic chorus and the protagonist, as Ashley’s voice speaks over the hissing, clicking ocean of syllables. “She was
a visitor” becomes strange. Perhaps she was a visitor to my house. Perhaps she was a visitor to the concert hall. Perhaps she was a visitor from
another planet. She gives us a glimpse of the futural essence of a thing.
Likewise, the phrase itself becomes a “visitor,” an alien being that rustles like a rainforest around Ashley. In the mouths of the audience, the
phrase becomes a hyperobject—distributed, yet there—like the image
in a Magic Eye picture that can only be glimpsed anamorphically, yet is
distributed throughout the picture plane, like a hologram. The past of
she was melts into the future, the future future, the unknown unknown.
John F. Simon’s Every Icon is an algorithmic piece, easily found online.41
Every Icon is software code that causes the microprocessor to produce


186

The Age of Asymmetry

every possible icon capable of being made out of a small grid, which consists of a series of cells that can be black or white. When left to run, given
sufficient energy, and given a universe whose duration is very different
from our own, Every Icon executes what it says in the title over the course
of ten trillion years. Or, as the accompanying text puts it succinctly:
Given:
An icon described by a 32 × 32 grid.
Allowed:
Any element of the grid to be colored black or white.
Shown:
Every icon.

Like Ashley’s She Was a Visitor, this is a disturbingly futural work. The
fact that the algorithm will stop, but only after 1012 years, conveys the
futurality of the hyperobject: very large finitude makes infinity humiliatingly easy, as I’ve argued earlier. Smith’s piece shows how hyperobjects
make clear the reality of execution—what algorithms do when they
run.42 Each momentary state of Every Icon is not Every Icon, because that
is the execution of an algorithm. Without an object-oriented theory
of objects at hand, the fact that each moment of Every Icon is not Every
Icon might cause us to imagine there was a Sorites paradox at work: the
ancient paradox of the heap, in which if I place a grain of sand next to
another, it is not a heap—and if I repeat this process, even tens of thousands of times, each time I check, there will be no heap, since adding one
grain does not make a heap. If no moment of Every Icon is the work itself,
then suddenly there is no work! The work withdraws, precisely because
it executes, a fact that is more significant than its duration. Every Icon is
ignoring us humans in its moment-to-moment procedural unfolding.43
The fact that we only see flickering pieces of a hyperobject is an indication of a hyperobject’s reality, not of its nonexistence.
The work of Jarrod Fowler exemplifies the object-oriented approach.
Fowler is a percussionist working in what he conceptualizes as the creation or discovery of non-music, a category that evokes François Laruelle’s
notion of non-philosophy, an attempt to see philosophy within a wider


The Age of Asymmetry

187

configuration space. In this sense, Fowler’s music includes the absolute
absence of music as well as the presence of noise. Yet these theories
become almost insignificant when one is confronted by the actual sound
of his pieces Percussion Ensemble and P.S., which consist of vast samplings of layer upon layer of percussion pieces. This layering gives rise to
what feels like a forest of glittering shards of broken glass stretching as
far as the ear can see.44 I wrote the sleeve note for P.S:
To generate, or rather to discover from within music itself, substances
that resist not only classification as music, but music as such. To locate
music as a small island of pseudo-consistency in a gigantic ocean of nonmusic, after François Laruelle. To locate noise as the infinitesimal subsidence of this island into the ocean, much bigger than noise, quiet, sound
and silence.
To force music to think about itself, as music. To see thinking about
music as distorted by what is exterior to thought, and even to human
being. To discover, with a slightly uncanny horror, that the wall between
human being and nonhuman is the appearance of the nonhuman itself. To
realize that this wall of resistance is a symptom of what the philosopher
Quentin Meillassoux calls hyperchaos.
To delineate through this method a working model of causality itself,
which operates by what Jarrod Fowler calls rhythmicity. To investigate
beats, which break up sonic continua: one beat as the miniscule flicker
of causality. To realize that this causality floats on top of and emerges
from the ocean of rhythmicity. To see, to hear that there is only this ocean,
continually sampling itself, breaking itself up into itself. To announce this
inherently contradictory reality in a sonic form as dialetheia, doubletruth: p ^ ¬p.45

In the ears, however, the music becomes a hyperobject, literally consisting of layers of beats and no-beats that offer dizzying perspectives of
phasing, high-dimensional sound (and non-sound). What we don’t have
here is a postmodern pastiche. What we have is a musical hyperobject, a
truly new entity. Imagine summing all the waves of all the rhythms in the
universe and constructing a musical hyperobject of the highest possible


188

The Age of Asymmetry

complexity—this would be the Platonic ideal (yet substantial and immanent) of this “non-music.”
Now, though enormous, this sum is necessarily incomplete! Why?
Because of the determinacy of the objects in the universe, including the
transmission media. For a beat to exist, at least one frequency is always
“left out” of the perceived beat—no music can ever be complete precisely
because there is an interaction between waves plus at least one wave that
is canceled out. To hear a beat at all, something must be erased. So there
really can be no “beyond” in which the absolute sum could be “heard”:
a fact that is very similar to Cantor’s diagonal proof of transfinite sets.
What Fowler’s music demonstrates, then, is a weird realism in which
objects are uncanny, futural, and slightly threatening. They exist in an
interobjective space that emerges from the coexistence of 1 + n objects,
as we saw in the section on phasing.
Most environmentalist art is constructivist, not object oriented, for
the simple reason that constructivism has been the dominant mode of
art in modernity. Another strange fact: the art that emerges at the inception of the Anthropocene is not fully capable of addressing it. The
350.org movement places the number 350 on gigantic surfaces, such as
beaches, that are photographed from above. Like the Nazca Lines in in
Peru, they cannot be seen fully from ground level. Three hundred and
fifty is the number of parts per million CO2 that is deemed acceptable
to avoid disastrous global warming. This graffiti is designed to change
your mind. Or consider the geographical map-like piece Wellness over
Time, by Marije de Haas (Plate 4). A detailed map of artists’ responses to
the Arctic is drawn to supplement maps of physical space, including a
cross section of isotherms influenced by the pioneering work of Humboldt. Comically, there is a variable (and appropriate symbol) for bowel
problems along with affective states, diet, and so on. The constructivist
work is a map, trying to give us more, ever more, even too much, so that
we can’t take it all in.
In 2011 some artists and architects and other scholars in Sydney were
trying to come up with ways to do an exhibition about hyperobjects.46
I suggested purchasing some space aboard a satellite that passed over
the exhibition space in its orbit. The idea is put about that something


The Age of Asymmetry

189

has been placed in a locked container aboard the satellite, something
known only to a few people, but with some unspecified significance to
do with hyperobjects. Then when the satellite passes over the exhibition,
it photographs people entering. When people enter the museum, they
give their e-mail addresses. At some randomly generated point after
people leave, the satellite sends them a photograph of themselves entering the museum. I wanted the artwork to be as threatening as possible.
But such a piece remains within a constructivist framework.
By contrast, consider Chris Wainwright’s, Red Ice 3, a photograph
of an iceberg in red light (Plate 5). To achieve this, Wainwright simply
photographed the iceberg with a red flash. As Wordsworth sneered, the
feminine is in play. The iceberg looks like the femme fatale Judy in
Hitchcock’s Vertigo, when she is flooded with red light and we realize
with creepy horror that she is indeed the woman from the earlier part
of the film. The ocean no longer looks deep and fishy, but more like a
rippling layer of latex. By heightening the artificiality, Keats-style, something of the object as such intrudes into human social and psychic space.
By tinting the mirror pinkish red, objects within it are realized to be
“closer than they appear.” The sudden disappearance of the background
pushes the iceberg forward like an actor in a drama or a figure in an
Expressionist painting.
Without a background, without Nature, without a world, the iceberg
haunts us. There is a weird effect of withdrawal and disturbing intimacy
all at once, like the pull focus, another favorite Hitchcock technique.
David Lynch movies and Chris Wainwright’s iceberg, or the dreampop
of Slowdive or Lush, are differently resonant than a constructivist map.
This resonance contains a vital ecological truth, because the objectoriented art of the Age of Asymmetry forces us to coexist with nonhumans—coexist without an agenda. Now we may see how astonishing it
is that Napangati was able to combine a map (constructivism) with a
device (object-oriented art) in Untitled 2011 (Plate 1), which I discussed
in “Phasing” in part 1.
Object-oriented art confronts us with the possibility of accommodating ourselves to things that are viscous and sticky and slow. Art that
sticks to us and flows over us. To this extent, Pink Floyd were not the first


190

The Age of Asymmetry

space rockers. They were the first exponents of viscous pop. Their very
name conjured up the huge bowl full of pink jello into which their fans
dived when they played live in 1967. Their early light show, the first to
use the oil wheel, covered the band in oozing light. We could read this
not as metaphorical for trippy space but as literal oil and radiation, covering their bodies, impossible to slough off. The oil slides developed by
Peter Wynne-Wilson speak to a phenomenological truth called sincerity.
There is no way to jump outside sensual objectivity, because when you
try, you find yourself slap in the middle of another one. As has been said
many times, there is no metalanguage.47 Irony becomes just another way
of sticking to hyperobjects. Or, in the words of Buckaroo Banzai, “Wherever you go, there you are.”48 Sincerity eats irony.
Consider Brenda Hillman’s poem “Styrofoam Cup,” a poem whose
title’s play with Greek announces in advance that this will be some kind
of remix of Keats’s On a Grecian Urn:
thou still unravished
thou,

thou bride

thou unstill,
thou unravished

unthou

thou

unbride

unbride49

On the one hand, the poem is a commentary on disposable culture
with its less-than-visible waste, in which mountains of Styrofoam form
a hyperobject of their own. On the other hand, by including the “waste”
within the poem, by returning to the commodity’s afterlife outside human
use, Hillman shows us, similarly to Keats and his urn, how objects are
not exhausted by our use, but rather persist beyond it, beyond the grave.
The cup haunts the poetic space, just as the Grecian urn seems to haunt
Keats with its “leaf-fring’d legend” that “haunts about [its] shape” (5). The


The Age of Asymmetry

191

poem takes the first line of Keats’s ode, “Thou still unravish’d bride of
quietness,” and repeats it (as in industrial production), while distorting
and as it were “crushing” it (like casual hands crumpling a Styrofoam
cup).50 The space around the lines becomes part of the poem, puffed up
like Styrofoam itself. It is as if wherever we look, we find pieces of Styrofoam, pieces of poetry lines—waste made visible. The cup, the poem,
and the first line are eminently repeatable and disposable. But this does
not get rid of the cup: it keeps returning weirdly, as if reincarnated or
zombified, as if no amount of crushing and reuse would “ravish” it. It
maintains an uncanny opacity, an opacity that extends beyond presence,
to an uncanny realm in which it is shot through with nothingness, an
“unbride”—undead, “unthou.” This is the Keatsian, object-oriented strategy par excellence. In this strategy, a strange pull focus effect occurs
whereby irony’s attempt to achieve escape velocity from sincerity is constantly thwarted, resulting in bigger and bigger physicality, like the expanding puffiness of Styrofoam.
Comora Tolliver’s Pod installation is a disturbing, wonderful exploration of our current ecological crisis (Plate 6).51 Rather than rely on
worn-out Nature-speak, Tolliver cuts to the heart of the matter and renders the strange mixture of intimacy, grief, and overwhelmingness that
is the current reaction to global warming and the Sixth Mass Extinction Event—an extinction triggered by human activity, the sixth major
one on Earth (the last was about 66 million years ago). Pod is entirely
covered with Mylar. At first glance it says, “Covering the world with
plastic brought this about, this destruction, this commodification, this
need to preserve now threatened with extinction.” It also references the
radiation-resistant foil covering the Lunar Module around the time Pink
Floyd were oozing through their powerful PA system. Like any truly
great work of art, however, Pod is a dialectical image that says a lot more
than that. The threshold of Pod vibrates with form and color so much
that nonhumans, such as dogs, take fright and run.
Pod is a seed bank turned into the visual equivalent of a huge wall
of guitar feedback. Inside the Pod is a grave-like hollow in which dead
flowers float in water. It’s as if the Pod contains a grave for the now dead
concept of Nature, a plastic fetish disguised as the real thing. For Tolliver,


192

The Age of Asymmetry

by contrast, Mylar is a distorting mirror held up to our non-Nature, a
mirror that refuses to reflect the human but instead reaches out to
destroy us. In this sense the floating flowers at the grave-like core of Pod
are the most artificial things in the entire installation. The threshold as
well as the interior melts with vibrant Mylar dripping with paint. So
reflective is the surface and so intense the light that the paint seems in
places to stand out from the surface down which it drips in fronds and
tentacles. It is as if background and foreground have been shockingly
suspended, leaving us with a hallucinatory, psychotic experience that is
at once intensely real yet at the same time uncannily withdrawn and
unspeakable. Like the gigantic oceans of sound produced by musicians
such as Spacemen 3, Sunn O))), or La Monte Young, Tolliver’s work is literally staggering, inducing neurological shock in the same way Bridget
Riley makes you see your own optic nerve. Tolliver replicates the viscosity of hyperobjects.
The jaw dropping loveliness of the colors that seem to melt in pure
space evokes a world that is far too close to be called a world, an ecological real that is right under our skin—it is our skin. We find ourselves
like prisoners waking up inside the ecological mesh of lifeforms. There
was no outside. The interstitial space of the Pod entrance screams, “You
are already inside this.” It’s a monument to the beginning of history.
How arrogant that we thought it was the end when the Berlin Wall came
down.
Marina Zurkow’s Mesocosms are two digital pieces that last over 140
hours. One is based in Northumbria, the other in Wink, Texas, the site
of a petroleum sinkhole (Plate 7). One starts the animation and lets it
run, and turns one’s attention to it coming and going as one does with
the weather—this compels us to see how boredom and anxiety are intrinsic to the scalar shift required to think about hyperobjects. There is a
strange dislocation: the temporal scale of the animations disturbs, while
the images resemble familiar pictures in a Nature coloring book. Yet
amid the charming familiarity, strange things happen. In the Northumberland animation, a portly naked man gets up and walks out of the
screen into the blank or void space on either side. A strange planet rises
off in the horizon. In the Wink, Texas, animation gorgeous butterflies


The Age of Asymmetry

193

float in slow motion while disconcertingly small people (children?) in
hazmat suits crawl across the landscape. Yet these strange events occur
alongside the ordinary. The stars come out. It rains.
A mesocosm is an ecologist’s term for a slice of an ecosystem that one
has isolated in order to study. Zurkow’s Mesocosms evoke uncanny feelings of being-with other things, lifeforms, horizons, the void around the
frame. To adapt a phrase of Derrida’s, there appears to be no outsidemesocosm: it is as if things considered to be Nature and Nature art are
still there (the sky, a tree, a butterfly, and the charming, children’s style of
illustrating them) while things considered not to be (voids, hazmat suits,
weird overlapping speeds) coexist alongside, eating Nature away slowly,
gently and thus with true remorselessness. In Zurkow’s Elixir series, we
watch the human as a fragile essence in a crystal decanter, storm-tossed
in waves or billowing clouds (Plate 8). There is a little world of liquids
within the decanter, and a vast ocean without, so that each bottle is a
mise en abyme of a larger nonhuman space. Inside each bottle, a cartoon
human flaps artificial wings, or surfs. The fragile glass decanters, containing their cartoon line drawing humans in their bottled worlds, are correlationist ships in bottles, storm tossed inside the hyperobject of climate.
Each bottle is a swollen glass head full of dreams, adrift in a real world.
A ne plus ultra of the object-oriented approach is JLiat’s found sound
piece, a series of straightforward recordings of the hydrogen bomb tests
in the Pacific.52 Words fail to describe the horror with which I heard the
first few seconds of the sound of the Bravo test, “the worst radiological disaster in US history,” as JLiat’s home page puts it. After those first
few seconds, I had to tear the headphones off my head. There’s something about hearing that sound, that actual sound. It has been sampled and translated of course into an MP3, yet it is a sample of the real
sound of a real object, a massive bomb. Hearing it rather than seeing
it, in a tiny movie image on YouTube behind the aestheticizing glass
screen of your computer, restores to the aesthetic dimension a trauma
and a pain that we edit out at our peril. Hearing it, in other words,
restores not full presence but spectral intimacy to the thing. This is the
promise of the object-oriented approach: not a back-to-Nature erasure
of art’s mendacity—that would be a denial of the Kantian gap between


194

The Age of Asymmetry

phenomenon and thing—but a strange reinforcement of the gap that
brings us into intimacy, into coexistence with strangers, which is ecological being-with.
Ecological awareness is without the present. The “As I write . . . ” trope
of ecomimesis is, without admitting it, an elegy to this totally lost presence.53 “As I write these words, snow is gently falling outside my hut at
the edge of the forest,” is an inverted acknowledgment of the towering
realities of the Anthropocene. The calls for a restoration of a balance that
never existed on Earth—Earth being the name for a text of geotrauma—
are desperate attempts to put the genie back in the bottle; or rather the
twin genies of Anthropocenic reason and Anthropocenic human force.
The perverse triumphalism that rubbernecks the sadistic victory of Gaia
over lifeforms deemed improper—the viral human—is a futile attempt
to master the irreducible uncanny futurality of things: all things—a Styrofoam cup that lasts for five hundred years, a dog dosed with strontium-90
encased in a block of concrete for forty years, the shadow of a human
impressed on a Hiroshima wall—an image eerily reproduced in Yves
Klein blue in 1961 (Figure 15).54
A more genuine acknowledgment of what is happening—the opening
for humans of the Rift between essence and appearance, the vanishing of
the present and of presence—is the work of Butoh, the Japanese “dance
of darkness” that was invented in the wake of Hiroshima.55 In Butoh, the
human body no longer floats as if weightless in abstract space, but is
pressed down from all sides by a horrible gravity, the spacetime emitted
by a gigantic object, preventing the human from achieving escape velocity. The waves of other beings distort the human face into sickening
masks of itself—faces that are already heavily made up to appear masklike. The body is powdered with ash as if from the fallout of an atomic
bomb.56 Cinders, ash, the trace, the shadow of a holocaust.57
Reality in the Anthropocene is becoming more vivid and “unreal,” spectral. Without a world, without Nature, nonhumans crowd into human
space, leering like faces in a James Ensor painting or the faces of Butoh
dancers. The difference between a face and a mask (in the Greek, prosōpon) collapses. Without presence, habitual, ontically given coordinates
of meaningfulness dissolve. This irreducible unreality is a symptom


The Age of Asymmetry

195

Figure 15. Human
atomic shadow (with
ladder), Hiroshima, Japan.
A human blocks the wall
from being totally
bleached by the
propagation of heat from
the blast. In light of this
image one might reverse
Foucault’s quip (at the end
of The Order of Things)
that the figure of man will
vanish like an image
drawn in sand on the
seashore. Hyperobjects
make clear the far more
disturbing fact that what
is called human continues
after the end of the
(human) world. Here the
human is literally a
shadow on a much larger
physical structure, a
shadow of the conversion
of matter to energy.

of reality as such with which the weird realisms (speculative realism,
object-oriented ontology) are beginning to cope as emergent features of
the uncanny intersection of geotrauma and human history. Covered in
ash, the human dances, caught in a horrible physicality: physicality without a beyond, without an outside, without presence.
Ecological coexistence is with ghosts, strangers, and specters, precisely
because of reality, not in spite of it. The coexistence of beings, without
an agenda, is predicated on what I call lameness. Lameness is the third
human attunement to the time of hyperobjects, the first two being
hypocrisy and weakness. Like hypocrisy and weakness, lameness has a


196

The Age of Asymmetry

very specific significance here. The fundamental reason for lameness
has to do with a special property of any given entity that is particularly
visible in the case of hyperobjects. An object fails to coincide with its
appearance-for another object, no matter how accurate that appearancefor. There is thus a lameness within every object, a lameness that constitutes the very being of the object as such. In order to exist, an object must
fail to coincide with itself totally. Existence, contra Alain Badiou, is not
consistency but rather a fragile inconsistency.58 Every object exhibits this
ontological inconsistency, but hyperobjects make it especially obvious. A
tornado is not global warming. A mountain is not planet Earth. Tissue
scars from x-rays are not radiation. A child is not the biosphere.
The lameness applies to humans, who now stand within the resonance of hyperobjects. There is a fissure between how we appear and
what we are, a fissure this study has called the Rift. The “inner space” that
Kant and others opened up in the Romantic period is only a distant
and inverted caricature of the Rift, like a photographic negative. The Rift
guarantees that inner space, no matter how deep or vivid or sensitively
attuned, is hermetically sealed from other entities. The Kantian experiences of beauty and the sublime are inner echoes of other beings, just as
the synthetic judgment that these experiences underwrite is a footprint
of these other beings.59 Even correlationism maintains a tenuous umbilical link with nonhuman realities. When hyperobjects are fully exposed
to human being, the power and freedom of the Romantic sublime inverts
itself into contemporary lameness. It is not an unpleasant reversal, unless
you really need to be on top all the time. Indeed, the “saving power” that
Hölderlin speaks of is truly the saving lameness of the Rift: the way in
which all things, humans no exception, are hobbled from within by an
ontological gap. Spirit now no longer floats in the zero gravity of inner
space. Instead, humans find nonhumans pressing in on all sides, in the
charnel ground at the end of the world.
Art in these conditions is grief-work. We are losing a fantasy—the fantasy of being immersed in a neutral or benevolent Mother Nature—and
a person who is losing a fantasy is a very dangerous person. In no sense
then should art be PR for climate change. Have you ever considered the
possibility of doing PR for a relentless army of zombies?


The Age of Asymmetry

197

Every aspect of hyperobjects reinforces our particular lameness with
regard to them. The viscosity that glues us to the hyperobject forces us
to acknowledge that we are oozing, suppurating with nonhuman beings:
mercury, radioactive particles, hydrocarbons, mutagenic cells, future
beings unrelated to us who also live in the shadow of hyperobjects. The
nonlocality of hyperobjects scoops out the foreground–background
manifolds that constitute human worlds. The undulating temporality
that hyperobjects emit bathes us in a spatiotemporal vortex that is radically different from human-scale time. The phasing of hyperobjects forcibly reminds us that we are not the measure of all things, as Protagoras
and correlationism promise. And like a wafting theater curtain, interobjectivity floats in front of objects, a demonic zone of threatening illusion, a symptom of the Rift between essence and appearance.
The object-oriented approach that frees hyperobjects for our beingwith them is Keatsian, in that it is a type of rest. Keats writes that, resting
in a room, he absorbs the qualities of those around him, like a chameleon: when “not himself goes home to himself,” because the identity of
everyone in the room has pressed upon him and annihilated his identity:
As to the poetical Character itself . . . it is not itself—it has no self—it is
every thing and nothing—It has no character—it enjoys light and shade; it
lives in gusto, be it foul or fair, high or low, rich or poor, mean or elevated.
It has as much delight in conceiving an Iago as an Imogen. What shocks the
virtuous philosop[h]er, delights the camelion Poet. . . . A Poet is the most
unpoetical of any thing in existence; because he has no Identity—he is continually in for—and filling some other Body—The Sun, the Moon, the Sea
and Men and Women who are creatures of impulse are poetical and have
about them an unchangeable attribute—the poet has none; no identity—he
is certainly the most unpoetical of all God’s Creatures. . . . It is a wretched
thing to confess; but it is a very fact that not one word I ever utter can be
taken for granted as an opinion growing out of my identical nature—how
can it, when I have no nature? When I am in a room with people if I ever
am free from speculating on creations of my own brain, then not myself
goes home to myself: but the identity of every one in the room begins [ for
so] to press upon me that, I am in a very little time an[ni]hilated.60


198

The Age of Asymmetry

Resting is an aesthetic event. Most of our comportment to hyperobjects
looks like “rest” right now in various forms: stunned silence, denial,
obsessive compulsive behaviors (endless 350s on beaches) that sum to
rest across the surface of Earth (when you see them from a high-enough
dimension). Meditation or contemplation is the quintessence of rest in
this sense. It does not have to be obsessive or stunned, however. “Rest”
simply means the way in which thinking handles what Husserl calls
“intentional objects.” Rest could be an attunement to the nonhuman,
coexisting with their necessary spectrality. Thinking is already, in itself,
a relation to the nonhuman, insofar as the logical content of one’s
thought is independent of the mind thinking it.61 In this sense thinking is intrinsically contemplative. Thus, when in meditation the mind
takes itself as its own object of rest, the withdrawn, secret quality of
the mind itself becomes poignant. Consider again Hillman’s “Styrofoam
Cup”: the distorted repetition is a form of contemplative attunement to
the cup as such, just as Keats seems to turn the Grecian urn around for
inspection. The uncanny thing is that the more one does such a task,
the less immediately graspable an object becomes—precisely because we
become more and more intimate with it. Such contemplation is far from
simplistically apolitical, far from a retreat from things.
Philosophical reflection on the hyperobject is also a form of rest.
There are various dimensions of this rest—mindfulness, awareness, simple letting-be—that are equally fascinating. Rest in this “positive” sense
suggests a deep acceptance of coexistence. Since Keats is not (ontically
given) Keats but is a symbiotic community of all the impressions of
others on his chameleon-like skin, what can he do but rest with that? Is
this a receptiveness only to subjective impressions? Yes, but in a modified sense. “Subjective impression” is far more than a merely whimsical
or self-centered interpretation of a thing, but an attunement to a thing’s
reality. This attunement might be distorted in some way, but in order
to be distorted there has to be a reality, an always-already going on.
Does this receptivity reduce objects to relations? No. My aesthetic–
causal impression of something is not that something, by definition. This
becomes obvious in the case of hyperobjects: the cold wet things I feel


The Age of Asymmetry

199

plopping on my head are not global warming, yet they are. Moreover,
since all entities are chameleon poets in this sense—since Keats and a
chameleon and a piece of chalcedony are all doing the same thing—all
entities are “resting.”
What have we witnessed in this book? Radiation, hydrocarbons,
global warming, and a number of other hyperobjects. Along with them,
we have seen the emerging reactions to hyperobjects as genuine nonhuman entities that are not simply products of a human gaze. Hyperobjects are not just the stuff of charts and simulations, but rather are a
huge objects consisting of other objects: global warming comprises the
sun, the biosphere, fossil fuels, cars, and so on. Thus, hyperobjects spell
the end of environmentalisms that employ Nature (a tool of modernity)
against modernity, fighting fire with fire, matter with matter, the present
with the present. To say the least, it is a surprising situation. One might
have thought that seeing ecology as connected feedback loops would
“undermine” (reduce downward) and “overmine” (reduce upward) all
entities on this planet into systems or material processes or discursive
effects.62 And one might have thought that it was environmentalism and
ecocriticism that pushed us out of modernity. But in effect that was the
last gasp of hot air inside the plane of modernity. What waited outside
was a hyperobject, and it is responsible for pushing us out of the plane:
we are now in the Age of Asymmetry. This age is marked by the birth of
speculative realisms that oppose the correlationist circle that emerged at
the time of the Anthropocene.
As we reach the end of this book, can we explore the Age of Asymmetry a little more carefully still? Human inner space is profound and
vast. We can comprehend infinity: we can comprehend the transfinite,
as Cantor showed with his astonishingly simple diagonal proof that we
can discern infinities larger than the infinity of rational numbers. When
I say “inner depth,” I don’t mean a dimensional “inside,” as if what I am
talking about lives inside the human skull. There is no necessary implication of psyche or soul or self. The closest is the thinking of Heidegger
on Dasein, being-in-the-world. By “world” Heidegger certainly doesn’t
mean something that environmental philosophers want him to mean:


200

The Age of Asymmetry

a set of comforting or inspiring or ennobling beings that surround us.
Dasein is profoundly uncanny. Dasein is the being after the end of the
world, if world is what this book means by that term.
The inner depth and strangeness of the human is real and is articulated
by many philosophers and artists, in particular Sophocles, whose chorus
from Antigone is the epigraph of this part of the book: “Many are the disturbing beings in existence, but none is more disturbing than man.”63
This passage fascinated Heidegger.64 The neuter plural term deina suggests fear and weirdness combined: it’s where the first part of the word
dinosaur comes from; Deimos was the brother of Phobos (fear). The best
word is “dreadful”: Deimos is the demon of dread, while Phobos is the
demon of panic. Dread is existentially prior to panic: panic is starting to
be a flight or fight situation, based on dread.
What makes humans the most dreadful is their ecological power. The
uncanniness of human being is that it stirs up the oceans, divides the
rocks, and ploughs up the soil. The chorus in Antigone sings of this in a
powerfully disturbing way. Antigone is about a woman who goes beyond
the law in the name of a transcendent law. Antigone is an uncanny
human who is even prepared to go outside the physical and normative
boundaries of the Greek city-state.
There is just one problem with the idea that humans are to deinotaton
(the most dreadful thing): all beings have a dreadful depth. The very
term to deinotaton, a neuter noun, brings to light that dreadfulness is
thing-like. My depth is not the uncanniness of this paperweight, a Perspex sphere in which floats a magnified dandelion in full puff, each tiny
hair visible and startling. A small rainbow hangs at the top of the sphere
and the fluorescent light of the banker’s lamp is reflected in it upside
down. I do not interpret the paperweight as an emergent property of
a fizzing buzz of dots or flecks of light and color: this actual paperweight unleashes its power, seducing me with its compelling roundness
and softness. Yet I am unable to grasp the essence of the paperweight,
whether I use the paperweight, ignore it, or contemplate it for the rest
of my life. Things are “standoffish,” as Stanley Cavell puts it, borrowing
from a line of thinking in Emerson’s essay “Experience”: “I take this
evanescence and lubricity of all objects, which lets them slip through our


The Age of Asymmetry

201

fingers then when we clutch hardest, to be the most unhandsome part of
our condition.”65
This seems like an understanding of things that the time of hyperobjects has enabled. I mean this in the fullest possible sense, so just to be
clear, let me restate it in stronger terms. Nonhuman beings are responsible for the next moment of human history and thinking. It is not simply
that humans became aware of nonhumans, or that they decided to ennoble some of them by granting them a higher status—or cut themselves
down by taking away the status of the human. These so-called posthuman games are nowhere near posthuman enough to cope with the time
of hyperobjects. They are more like one of the last gasps of the modern era, its final pirouette at the edge of the abyss. The reality is that
hyperobjects were already here, and slowly but surely we understood
what they were already saying. They contacted us.
Hyperobjects profoundly change how we think about any object. In a
strange way, every object is a hyperobject. But we can only think this
thought in light of the ecological emergency inside of which we have
now woken up. Heidegger said that only a god can save us now.66 As we
find ourselves waking up within a series of gigantic objects, we realize
that he forgot to add: We just don’t know what sort of god.



